# 2010

Friends and fellow Singaporeans, good evening. This is my first National Day Rally after the general elections. My team has a fresh mandate to implement our programmes to grow the economy, to improve our education system, to expand our healthcare system, housing, transport and so on.  I have a new team that is settling in.  It is gelling together to tackle both long range issues as well as immediate challenges which Singaporeans face. 

From a national perspective, Singapore has done very well.  Over the last five years, we ran into the worst storm we have ever encountered since independence.  But we took bold and decisive measures, especially the Resilience Package and the Jobs Credit. The measures worked and sheltered us from the worst of the storm.  If you look and compare today with five years ago, I think we can honestly say incomes have gone up some, people have jobs and homes, our city has been upgraded and Singapore is better.  But unfortunately, it was such a powerful storm that even with a big and strong umbrella, we could not avoid getting a little bit wet. So Singaporeans felt the discomfort, the anxiety - compounded because of the rapid changes which we could not predict and which left us worrying what tomorrow would bring.

After the crisis passed, our economy bounced back faster than we had expected, which should be good news but it also brought its own problems.  Our infrastructure programmes could not quite catch up, there was a shortage in our housing programme, and people became very anxious over their HDB flats.  Our public transport became a bit more crowded than it should be and people noticed.  From a personal perspective, many citizens feel pressure in their daily lives even though you see the growth figures.  Last year 14.5 per cent; this year so far, nearly five per cent, and they ask themselves, why has my cost of living gone up?  Can I or my children afford to buy homes for ourselves?  What about my healthcare costs as I grow old? In short, Singapore may be progressing, the country may be moving forward, but am I part of this progress, am I part of this story? 

I can fully understand and empathise with these concerns because it has been a difficult ride - bumpy, stormy and causing anxiety from time to time. But we are tackling these problems, building more flats, improving our public transport, managing the inflow of foreign workers and immigrants.  It will take a while to solve these problems because they are big and complicated issues, but we are heading in the right direction and things will gradually get better.  So, please be patient and at the same time, please try and look beyond these problems which we can see as immediate concerns and look to longer-term, wider world issues which affect us and are of strategic importance to us.  

We have got to implement long-term policies to keep Singapore growing because otherwise, without the right long-term strategy, there will be no Singapore success story for any Singapore citizen to be part of.  Our outlook depends on our getting our strategies right but it also depends on our external environment.   If you look around you in the external environment, you do not have to look very hard to notice that some dark clouds are gathering. America and Europe have major problems, still unresolved, which are not just problems for themselves but which pose a serious risk to world growth.  In Europe, Greece has been bailed out for now, again, but the markets know that this problem has not gone away.  What they have done is to kick the can down the road and sooner or later, it is going to pop up again.  It is not just a problem of Greece.  It has spread beyond Greece and there are issues with Portugal, Ireland, which can be managed, and even Spain and Italy which are bigger and not so easy to manage. And the banks which lent to these countries, which may be French banks, German banks, banks in Britain - that is an even bigger problem still. 

So Europe is troubled.  America is also troubled.  S&P downgraded America’s long term debt from AAA to AA+.  What does it mean?  It highlights serious long term problems - government is spending too much, the fiscal deficit is unsustainable and if they do not correct it, they are heading for trouble.  But they are not able to correct it because there are deep divisions between the Democrats on one side and the Republicans on the other as to what to do.  One side wants to make sure taxes are never raised, the other side wants to make sure benefits are never cut. Therefore the deficit is not going to go down and confidence and growth in the longer term is not going to return.  That is the reason why over the last two weeks, you have seen the financial markets go up and down. If you are investing in the stock market, I am sure every day you will be looking at your Blackberry, seeing whether it has gone up or gone down.  But the volatility is only a reflection of the real issue and the real issue is that investors around the world lack confidence that these governments will be able to make the hard decisions and to resolve the problems which are deep and very serious. 

In Asia, with this global backdrop, China, India and the emerging markets are doing quite well but if America and Europe go into another recession, then I think China and India and the emerging economies will also be affected and vulnerable.  Therefore, Singapore has to be watchful.  We do not have to press the panic button yet but we have to be watchful because there is quite a possibility that the world will go into another recession and that is going to affect us.  It can easily happen. Bob Zoellick, who is President of the World Bank, gave a speech yesterday in Australia and he said as much.  Now that he is not a politician, he can say it as it is, so we should take it seriously. 

In Singapore we have to keep a twin focus – address the stresses and strains that people feel but also track and respond to our external challenges and keep our long-term strategies right.  In other words, we have to get our politics right as well as our policies right and if you can get both of these, then we can engage all our people to build Singapore together.  And to get both right, you must start with the politics, which is what I will do.

During the general election in May, many issues got hotly debated and it is quite natural that during a debate, issues will crystallise, be amplified, the differences will be sharpened and people’s consciousness will be focused on the problem. This time there were more diverse views which were expressed a lot more strongly, not only in rallies but also on the Internet, in the social media and SMSes, all the new technology offerings.

It is useful to have had a vigorous debate and a full airing of these views; it shows energy and concern. People are focused on the issues, so let us harness this energy to make Singapore stronger but let it not divide our society.  My government will reach out to all segments of Singapore society to understand your perspectives, to share ideas and concerns with you, to work with you to come up with plans and programmes which will benefit all of us.  I think there are many concerned Singaporeans who are thinking about this, even after the elections, with critical but thoughtful views.  They do not agree with everything the government has done or is doing but they acknowledge the good work and the progress and they are concerned that we should make things better and not throw the baby out with the bath water. 

A good number of people like this have written to MPs, to ministers. I have received quite a number myself - thoughtful, cogent presentations of why they think things turned out as they did, and what they think we should do now.  I think that people like this give hope that Singaporeans want the country to progress and prove that there are people who are prepared to come forward and to make our system work better. I encourage all those who have written to us in this spirit to come forward, whether online or in real life, and help to strengthen the constructive climate of opinion so that your government can do right for you and do right for Singapore. 

I think in person or face to face on TV, we know how to do it.  But engagement online, I think we need to learn to do it better.  It is not easy to do but it is important because the digital media is continuing to grow in importance.  Five years ago YouTube was insignificant, Facebook did not exist; all you had was mrbrown.  Today mrbrown has a lot of competition.  We in government have a lot of competition and we have to be able to operate in that space.  It is not easy because it is anonymous, it is chaotic, it is unfiltered, unmoderated and so the medium lends itself to many negative views and ridiculous untruths, any number of them.  I will not repeat one because otherwise you may misunderstand and think it is true.  But if you just open at random, you will see them and we have to do our best to counter this, to prevent untruths from circulating and being repeated five, 10, 20 times from leading people astray. After a while, you have heard it so often, you cannot remember where you saw it but you think that it must be true.  But it is not. 

Our ministers have to get better at this and you know many ministers are blogging now, interacting on Facebook etc. They have to communicate in a different medium and convey nuance, policy, intentions and explanations in a more personal way by engaging people.  But it is not just the ministers doing this, the government as a whole has to be more active and adept in engaging Singaporeans online.  We cannot be in every corner of cyberspace because there are a lot of cowboy towns out there but there must be places which grow, where people recognise are reliable, where you can have an open debate where different views are expressed; but it is balanced and if you go there, you know that to start off with, you can assume that it will make sense.  Whether it is right or wrong, you have to consider the arguments but it is not rubbish. 

We have got to get there, be in cyberspace and use it constructively to explain issues, to shape opinions, to rally support and to make Singapore work better.  I am very encouraged that Singaporeans are engaging but I am even more encouraged that they are going beyond giving views in order to come forward and to actually work with one another and with the government on projects which matter to them and which are good for Singapore.  I will give you a couple of examples because I think that is the most vivid way to convey the things which Singaporeans are getting together and doing and getting mobilised on. 

One of them is the KTM railway line, the land we took back on July 1 and on which we are creating a green corridor along the railway.  There are many views outside encouraging the government to make this a beautiful green corridor, to add to the amenities of living in Singapore.  MND, URA and me, we are very keen on this, so URA has been carrying out an extensive public consultation.  Khaw Boon Wan is in charge but Tan Chuan Jin has been personally focused on this and talking to the different nature groups and civic groups outside, looking for creative ways to preserve the green spaces without affecting the development potential of the land which can be developed, because there are lands which can be developed and which should be developed because they are very valuable.  But a strip of the railway, I think we can do something interesting with that.  We have got many bright ideas, some from students, some from architects, some from design professionals and they sent them to us.  They want to use some sections as creative arts and performing spaces.  They want to develop a leisure corridor, link them to our park connector network and there are some pictures which you can see.  This is Sungei Pang Sua, this is a canal.  The actual railway line is just beyond the trees but we can transform this and here is one proposal, to make it look like this.  The amenities will be for the residents, for Singaporeans.  The canal becomes a meandering stream and the houses behind - their property value is likely to go up.  But I think that is good. 

There is another proposal from a recent architecture graduate from NUS, Ms Regina Koo, who put some effort into designing a project also around the same area.  Her proposal is to build this structure which she calls a “Velo Park”, which means it is a centre for bicycle activities.  You have bikeways, you have bicycle rental stalls, a club, a bike café, you can go in and have a bite on your bike. It is creative, it is imaginative and I hope we get many more bright ideas like this and then we will have a range, a menu to choose from. When we have a decision taken and the plans are settled, I hope the interest groups which are engaged in this will actively participate in implementing the projects.  So do not just tell us what to do, help us to do it. 

This is one interesting project. Another interesting project is the Yellow Ribbon Project which you will have probably heard of, and its objective is to help to rehabilitate ex-offenders, people who are released from prison, and to lower the re-offence rate which we have done quite successfully.  In fact we have the lowest re-offending rate probably in the world.  There are more than 900 volunteers who give their time and energy, who work closely with government agencies to do this Yellow Ribbon Project. One of the volunteers, Mr Philip Tan, had an idea to do this particular project.  If you read it, it says “Dining Behind Bars”.  That means for the public to go to prison, to have lunch inside the prison.  First you have to go through the bars, these are the guests arriving and the inmates will prepare the meal for you. It is not just a prison meal, it is a special meal because they are being guided by the MediaCorp’s “Chef for Hire” Ryan Hong.  Then they eat in style, this is inside the prison and the room is called the Changi Tea Room and this is the chef, Ryan Hong, who masterminded it.  You see at the back of the room, they have some pictures. Those are artworks done by the prisoners.  After the meal, they have an auction of the artworks.  The end result - raise money for the Yellow Ribbon Fund and also let the public know that our inmates are working hard to rehabilitate themselves and that they deserve a second chance.  This is the sort of thing which the government cannot do very well by itself as a government department.  We can facilitate it, we can encourage it but you need people with a passion who will put their heart and soul into it and dream up new ideas like this.

So that is what we are looking for.  Not everything can be done through such volunteer efforts and in government, not every policy can go through extensive consultation.  Sometimes, the government just has to deliberate and decide because it is sensitive or there is no time or is an issue where the government has to make up its mind.  For example, when it has to do with national security or during crises, you cannot go round asking people what to do. The government has to carry the can.  Also even after discussion, we will not always be able to reach agreement or consensus and having heard all the views, the government would have to do what it considers right for the country and then take responsibility for its decision. 

Matters can be big or small.  We receive many requests every day and not every request to the government can be fulfilled.  It could be just to waive a traffic fine or a library fine, it could be just to give a person in the queue priority over other persons in the queue.  We may or may not be able to satisfy such requests but whether we can or cannot say yes, we must always maintain courtesy and mutual respect when we discuss these issues.  Government departments have to do that, frontline staff have to do that and every day, our frontline staff in the government departments deal with thousands of Singaporeans.  Our teachers in schools, our HDB staff at the counters and in the area offices, our town council staff, our hospital staff, PA and the community centres - thousands, if not tens of thousands, of engagements. Most members of the public will be civil and I think most of the time it works well.  But some people will press hard and some can be quite demanding.  And the agencies tell me that such cases of people being demanding have grown more common in the last few months.  And the frontline staff are feeling under pressure. 

For example there was one person who went to a government department and at the counter, he wanted something, he could not get it and this is what he told the staff. He said, “I don’t care what your policies and rules are, your job is to make sure that I qualify as a special case.  Find the rules, find the right rule to make sure that I am a special case and I want you to do it now”.  Now, how would you feel if you were at the counter dealing with this case? How should you react? Can you really say yes? Can the government say yes? Then what happens when the next person comes and says I also want a special rule? So we have to be able to manage such cases. I encourage the frontline staff: do your best, be firm, fair, courteous, even when under pressure.  Your job is not easy but it is an important job. Do it well, and we will back you up.  I hope the public will also be civil even when you do not get what you are asking for because with restraint and good sense on both sides, we can solve more problems and we can strengthen the relationship between the people and the government. 

But beyond attending to matters like this, I encourage Singaporeans to come forward to play a larger and positive role.  To sort out issues and compromises together without getting the government, without needing the government to get into the loop. Best of all to take the initiative yourself and to make something happen and to make a difference to the lives of others.  One good example of this which I cannot resist showing you is a young man who is a photographer, his name is Sam Kangli and he lives in an HDB block in Tampines. And he realised that his neighbours may see each other every day but they do not really know each other that well, and Kangli is in the audience.  So he took the initiative to take family portraits of his neighbours at their doorsteps to help them get to know one another. And here are some of the pictures.  So through this exercise taking pictures, he succeeded in breaking the ice and now when the neighbours meet one another they acknowledge one another, they greet one another, there is more small talk in the block and when he comes back and gets back from work, the neighbours who happen to be going out will tell him come, take my parking lot, it is free.  So this is Kangli here who took all these pictures. 

So I think we look forward to many more examples of active citizenship like this.  We are a young nation and we are to develop and to mature, we have to harness our diverse views and ideas, put aside our personal interests and forge common goals.  Come to some agreement that this is something worth doing together – let us make it happen.  And we need active citizens to change our community for the better.  So work with us, make it happen, stand up and do our part to shape Singapore’s future. 

If we get this basic working relationship right, then we can get our policies right.  I think by and large our policies, the major ones in Singapore, are headed in the right direction. They may need fine-tuning, adjusting; the rough edges have to be smoothed off but we are heading in the right way. I would like to use two examples tonight of broad policy areas to give you a sense of how we should maintain our direction at the same time as we make this adjustment. 

One of these policies is foreign workers and immigrants.  It is not easy to maintain because these are policies where the benefits are there but they are long term, whereas the downsides are immediate, the side effects are visible and people react to them and we have to respond to this. The foreign workers and immigrants we have taken have given us considerable benefits. Our economy has grown, our population has increased but over the last few years, the changes have been taking place quite fast and Singaporeans worry about the impact on them. 

Last year I spoke of this at length in the Rally, so I will not repeat the explanations which I gave you, hopefully you remember what I said last year. I think Singaporeans understand the logic of the policy but the emotional impact, they still feel that and that still causes worry and concern.  So I empathise with this and we are acting to relieve the pressures and to make clear that we are putting Singaporeans first.  Tonight, what I would like to explain is not the basic rationale which I think you know but to talk about three further areas where we can help Singaporeans to cope with these issues and the consequences of these issues –housing, education and jobs. 

Let me start with housing.  I think it is at the top of a lot of people’s minds.  It is a key expression of putting Singaporeans first.  Our home ownership policy ensures that every family has a stake in Singapore.  But in the last two years, with property prices going up, spiking up sharply, many people have become unsettled.  Young couples especially because they want to get married, they want to book a flat, they want to start their family and no flat means baby is put off.  Or worse, they fear they would not be able to afford the homes when they finally get the flat. 

So HDB is building many more flats.  This year 25,000 BTO flats and I think in recent tenders or recent BTO exercises, the ratio of applicants to flats has gradually been coming down.  And we will keep on putting out the supply onto the market. One group who is most worried is those who are earning just below $8,000. It is just below the income ceiling and they fear that they may breach the ceiling.  There are more such couples now because people are getting married later, so they are applying for flats when they are more senior in their careers, so their incomes have gone up.  There are more women who are working so the family income has also gone up and so they are quite worried because if they are earning $7,500 and you get a promotion, you are not sure whether that is good news or bad news because you may get promoted to $8,500 and then you have to write an appeal to your MP before they get their HDB flat.

We have been studying this for some time, so what we will do is we will raise the HDB ceiling for income per household from $8,000 to $10,000.  And for executive condominiums where the ceiling is $10,000 now, we will raise that to $12,000.  So we will bring more people into the HDB net and you do not have to worry so much.  But the result of bringing more people into the HDB net is that there is going to be more demand for the BTO flats. We have got to make sure that HDB builds enough flats to cope with this extra demand.  I have discussed this with Khaw Boon Wan and he has talked to his staff and next year, HDB will be able to build another 25,000 BTO flats, same as this year.  And that is a big number. He is quite confident that with these measures, we can meet the demand and we can keep the price of new flats stable and affordable.

However, there is a minority of Singaporeans who cannot afford to purchase flats, cannot afford home ownership and they will need rental flats.  We know this and we are increasing the supply of rental flats. Over the next two years, we will add 7,000 rental flats to our supply so we can cater to more families who need this help.  We are also postponing the demolition of some SERS blocks so that we can use them as temporary rental units because when you do a SERS project, you build a new block, you move the people from the old block into the new blocks and the old blocks can be demolished and redeveloped in due course. But instead of demolishing them now, we can use them as temporary rental flats until we can relieve the pressure on rentals and we can do the redevelopment a little bit later on.  And I think all these measures will ease the waiting time and make things better for households who may be very anxious to get a solution to their housing problems.  But I should say that building more rental flats is not really the most fundamental solution to the problems which these households face because their problems are really upstream.  They have run into financial difficulties or their families have split up, or there have been some gambling or some business failure, and so as a result they have cashed out on their flat which they already own and now they want a rental flat as another safety net. This is something that we have to study and address because these are deeper social issues, not so easy to solve. But overall, I promise you we will keep housing available and affordable for Singaporeans. 

So the first thing we are making a move on is housing. Another area where we need to make some adjustment is university education, university places.  Education is one of the issues which is at the top of nearly every Singaporean’s minds; a passionate concern, whether you are a student mugging for the next exam, trying to get into the next institution, next school or you are a parent, kan cheong, worrying about your kid.  The university term has just begun and this year a record number of Singaporeans are going to universities in Singapore – 12,000. One in four students of every cohort, every person that age, is going to university.  We have never had so many or so big a proportion and I congratulate all of them and their parents for doing well and for taking this significant step in their education.  But even then, not all those who applied could be admitted and not all those who got into university got their first choice of course because the competition for courses, the competition for places in some courses, is very intense.  For example, in the medical school here in NUS, we have 300 places for medical students but 2,000 students applied to do medical school, and all of them have outstanding results: three As, four As, CCA, secondment, internship, all sorts, whatever is necessary to improve their chances, they have done it.  But there is no way that we can take 2,000 so unfortunately quite a number had to be disappointed and we received many appeals from parents and students.  I got one myself whom I met in my meet-the-people session and she came to see me.  I said good evening, she said good morning.  Why? Because she had waited for me and it was about 12.30am by the time she saw me.  But it was that important to her, she made the effort. 

I get many emails, so have the ministers.  I like to quote from one, written by a mother of a student trying to get into university. She wrote a long email but I will just quote one section. She said, “I am very saddened by all the statements made in the general election about “Singaporeans first”.  I am not asking for financial help nor housing nor complaining about GST or cost of living.  What I am asking for is a place for my child to further his education.  Why do not you give him a chance?”  So it is a heartfelt plea which I think many parents will empathise with and which we feel too because we read all these appeals and we understand how the parents passionately want the best for their kids.  Even so, unfortunately not all the appeals succeeded although this one did.  The son was interviewed by NTU, eventually admitted - but I should explain, on his own merits and not because of special intervention by me.  But for those who did not get in, my advice is: do not give up.  There are many different pathways up, we are providing a good education for all our students, whether or not you go to university or poly or the ITE, or you go to work, and later on you advance into the university - there are many opportunities to keep upgrading yourselves, not just once-off but all your lives.  And whichever way you go, do your best, do well because that way you open up more opportunities and that way I think you make it easier for us to help you. 

One unhappiness is the feeling that maybe foreign students have taken the place of locals in the universities because our universities do take a proportion of foreign students.  Right now they have about 18 per cent foreign students but I should say that these foreign students have not been at the expense of the local student intake because we have steadily increased the number of places for Singaporeans in our universities.  So if you look at it, ten years ago, we only had 9,000 students in the universities, Singapore students, as I told you just now, we have 12,000, more than ever.  And it is the result of our investments, our programmes to build and our determination to provide as many places as possible for Singaporeans and the best experience for the students who go to university. There are many benefits for the local students to have foreign classmates. It prepares them better for the global workplace, it exposes them to the competition and makes them, spurs them to work harder and give their best and quite often the local and the foreign students will even partner and make new start-ups.

And here is one example of a start-up done by local and foreign NUS students. The company is called BioMers. It produces translucent braces, orthodontic braces, this is the thing they are making and you cannot see it on the teeth because it is meant to be invisible so you can look beautiful or handsome even while you straighten your teeth.  The key people in this project are three Singaporeans. The two girls in front: Renuga, who did the research; Karen, who was a research assistant, helped her to do it, both from NUS. Then Mervyn who was also from NUS, knew of this, went to the UK to study, and there he met George, and George is very interesting because George is a Canadian Greek and the two of them developed the technology further to make it commercialisable. They came back and they started the company, and they brought in Bindu who is also an NUS student and he comes from India and so this multinational team set up a start-up.

The startup now has 26 staff and more than half of the staff are Singaporeans.  When you have this international mix in our universities, it is good for our students. We have got to keep on doing this but we also have to strike the right balance between the local and foreign students.  We take in 12,000 Singapore students annually now at our universities and we are going to expand the intakes further considerably.  Over the next four years, we will expand university intakes by 2,000 university places, and that is a lot of places because the whole of Singapore Management University only takes about 1,700 students each year.  We are talking about one extra SMU-plus’ intake over the next four years and all 2,000 additional places will go to Singapore students.  By 2015 our universities will take in 14,000 Singapore students, more than ever before.  But while we do this, we will cap the foreign enrolment at the present levels and therefore gradually the mix will shift and the proportion of foreign students will come down.  But this is not the end point because we continue to develop beyond this and beyond 2015, I believe the universities should expand their enrolments further because the economy will need more graduates and our schools and our polys are producing more students with good results and many of our students passionately want to go to university and have the grades and the capability to benefit from a university education.  I think we should allow as many as possible to have that opportunity.  MOE is studying how best to do this - may not be just from expanding the existing universities, maybe we have to open new routes.  It is something we should study further. 

But whether it is houses, whether it is university, whether it is jobs, which I am coming to next, we put Singaporeans first but in an open-minded sort of way.  For jobs, we have let in a steady inflow of foreign workers into our economy at all levels and because of that, our economy has thrived and we have full employment - everybody has a job.  All Singaporeans, nearly every Singaporean is working.  Unemployment is only about 2.2 per cent overall but still I know that Singaporeans worry about competition from foreigners. 

Sometime ago I had a dialogue with young people and one polytechnic student asked me this very direct question.  He said: “You know you have the ‘S’ pass for people who are one level above the work permit.  Why do you set the S pass qualifying salary at $1,800?”  Why did he ask me that question?  Because really what he meant was $1,800 is less than what many poly diploma holders are earning.  Poly diploma holders earn more than that.  If you set the level there, you are going to have people who will be earning less than us but competing against us, so why do you let the foreigner compete directly against me? 

I understand those feelings but we need some non-Singaporeans to complement the Singaporeans and to make up our shortfall.  But at the same time, we also realise that it is important that Singaporeans remain the core of our workforce.  We cannot become like the Gulf states where 80 per cent of the people who are working are foreigners and if you go there, whether it is the person in the hotel, whether it is the bank, whether it is the airport counter, or any of the jobs, it is foreigners working and we cannot be like that.  We have tightened up on foreigners progressively.  We have tightened up the foreign workers levy, we have tightened up on the dependency ratios.  The ‘S’ pass we have pushed from $1,800 to $2,000, that is of some help to the poly diploma holders and people who are at that level and therefore we have protected Singaporean workers, especially at the lower end.  But we also have to be mindful of the impact on companies, especially local SMEs, because they need the foreign workers the most and if we squeeze out the foreign workers too drastically, we are going to kill the SMEs.  We are helping the SMEs to adjust: grants, tax deductions, all sorts of schemes to help them to upgrade their productivity and we have to bear that in mind when we settle our policies. 

At the top end of the workforce, we have to allow high quality professionals and entrepreneurs because they grow our businesses here and help Singapore compete internationally.  If you look at what we are doing, at the bottom, we are tightening; at the top we have to be free.  In between we have to make some adjustments. The middle, the lower middle level - foreigners are here, many on employment pass. Singaporeans are working - they are probably graduates or diploma holders, not hard up, not unskilled but not so confident of themselves that they are ready for unrestrained competition. They are feeling vulnerable, worried about what may happen.  I think at this middle level, we need to tighten a little bit further.  We need to raise the salary requirement for the employment pass holders, tighten up the educational qualifications, make sure they come with real skills valuable to us and this is something MOM has worked on and will announce details soon.  MOM will also work with tripartite partners, so as to develop guidelines for fair employment practices and responsible recruitment practices so that when you have a Singaporean working side by side with a foreigner, they both feel fairly treated and nobody feels that he is at a disadvantage.  This is something which we will work together with the unions and employers. 

But I should caution you on one thing - just because we are tightening on foreign workers does not automatically mean that Singaporeans will get better jobs or higher pay because the competition is not just the foreign worker here.  You are competing with workers all over the world.  Unskilled workers have felt this for a long time but increasingly our graduates and professionals are also seeing this happen.  In China every year seven million graduates graduate from university, double the number of Singaporeans.  Of these, 1.5 million are engineering and science types.  They are hungry, they are competitive and they are competing furiously with one another in China and I think the impact will be felt around the world for the next 20 years, including us.  It is really a tidal wave, a tsunami coming in our direction and the only way to get out of the trouble is to rise above the tsunami by training ourselves, developing expertise and doing things which they cannot do yet in China but which we can do now in Singapore so that we can make a living for ourselves in order to improve our lives.  But even if we do that, we have to accept that if we bring down the number of foreigners, slow the inflow, it means slower growth, less economic growth, somewhat less vitality, companies will come here not so vigorously or they may choose to expand elsewhere and we will have less resources to improve our lives. You have got to find the right balance. 

Yes we will moderate and manage the foreign workers but we have to bring in enough so that we have the manpower and the talent to grow and to prosper.  This is what we must do when it comes to putting Singaporeans first, stay open but moderate our policies, solve the problems, whether it is housing, whether it is education, whether it is jobs.  It has worked, we have brought global winners here and we have created prosperity for Singaporeans. 

One example of this is Lucasfilm Singapore.  Last year I talked about them but I think this year there is something interesting to share with you again. Lucasfilm in Singapore has 500 employees from 36 countries; nearly half of them are Singaporeans, skilled people, animators, visual effect artistes, engineers. Many of them graduated from our polys which have very good digital arts and digital animation courses and the team here has helped to produce many successful movies.  I showed you “Clone Wars” two years ago but the latest movie which we have been working on here is “Transformers 3: Dark of the Moon” and I will show you just one short clip done jointly by the team here and the team in San Francisco.  Those of you who watched Transformers movies will know that this is a movie clip of Bumblebee: 10 seconds on the screen or eight seconds on the screen but more than 10 people worked on it - layout, simulation, animation, lighting, all kinds of skills, highly-refined. This is only possible because you have this very diverse team with all the people from all around the world put together to make it happen.  Let us stay open, keep current with new ideas and trends, stay ahead of the competition and let us stay a confident, forward looking and successful society. 

The second area of policy which I would like to share with you to show how we are keeping our direction while adjusting our implementation is our social safety nets - how we need to care for one another.  We are living in a time of rapid changes.  Last five years you have seen the changes.  Over the next five years, I think there will be many unexpected surprises to come and it is important that nobody is left behind as we dodge and shift and find our way through the troubles. 

We aim for inclusive economic growth.  We want to encourage people to be self-reliant, for families to give mutual support to one another and to be able to look after themselves as much as possible, but there will be a minority who cannot keep up or who will fall on hard times.  For them, we need a social safety net.  The way we have done it which I think has been successful has been to give people assets, especially an HDB flat; help them become self-reliant by giving them a very good education, provide them affordable medical care through the 3Ms - MediShield, Medisave, Medifund – and also government subsidies through the hospitals, and then to have targeted assistance to those who need help through many helping hands.  The result is that nearly all citizens are employed, housed and able to look after themselves. 

The last five years have been stressful and so we have introduced new programmes which have helped - Workfare to raise the incomes of lower income Singaporeans, Comcare to provide tailored support for individuals and families with specific needs.  Since we introduced Comcare six years ago, we have had 200,000 people helped by the schemes.  So we have got a blossoming of all kinds of local programmes involving community leaders, the grassroots groups, the VWOs, doing interesting things on their own initiative with government support and backing.  For example, they distribute food to needy households or they teach low income families budgeting skills.  This is not Monopoly, this is called “Moneywise” and it is a programme introduced by Southeast CDC to teach low income families how to manage and budget their money and is quite successful in getting them to be able to save, to allocate and to learn how to cope.  Or we have people who are befriending the elderly, taking them on outings.  This is a group who took wheelchair-bound elderly to Marina Bay, I do not think to the casino. Or maybe you just take them out for a meal and enjoy some companionship together in a hawker centre and cheer up their day, add some warmth and brightness to their lives.  That is how I think we can make a big difference to the lives of Singaporeans who need help. 

The next five years - there is going to be rapid change.  Our aging population is going to throw up new challenges and there will be other groups which will have specific needs which we have got to tackle.  We will keep on improving our social safety net, enhancing it, keep the present approach but improve the schemes and I would like to talk about two things which we will be doing tonight. 

One is to do with medical care and particularly with outpatient treatment, especially for older people.  Many Singaporeans worry about medical expenses, especially if you are older or you have an elderly member in your family.  The 3M framework, Medisave and so on, works well for inpatient care but for outpatient treatment, I think we can do better.  One group of these elderly is those who need long term care.  They may be bed-ridden or they may have Alzheimer’s and I talked in the Chinese speech just now of some of the things we are doing to help this group.  We will give more support, expand services, make the services more affordable. 

Another group is patients who have chronic ailments, maybe high cholesterol, maybe high blood pressure, maybe diabetes and amongst the people who are in their 70s maybe half will have one chronic ailment or another.  When you have something like this, you will know that you need regular checkups and you need long term medication.  It is not that you take the pill 10 days and the problem is cured.  You have these pills, take it for the rest of your life, every three or six months see the doctor, the doctor will examine you, adjust the dosage, six months later see again.  Try and keep well for as long as you can.  But the pills can be expensive, particularly over a long period of time and the low income patients tell me they may skip an appointment because they fear they cannot afford the pills. Or they may say “the doctor says I eat this every day but I take it every other day instead to save money”, which is not the way it is supposed to be done because if you do that, your condition will worsen and more trouble will come later on, serious complications. 

I think that we should make outpatient care more affordable and accessible for this group: the elderly and the not so elderly.  We have a scheme to help elderly chronic patients like this.  It is called the Primary Care Partnership Scheme (PCPS), which helps the low income elderly and disabled.  What it means is: you have a card, you are registered, you can see your GP instead of going to the polyclinic but you get a subsidy like you are going to the polyclinic.  It is more convenient, you have more choices and you probably get faster service.  We will change this scheme which is now quite restrictive and where you have to be 65 years old before you are considered for this scheme.  We will change it so that you can start at the age of 40.  Because when you have high blood pressure or cholesterol or diabetes, by the age of 40 it is beginning to show up particularly if you have not looked after yourself.  When you have conditions like this, the earlier you start treating, the better I think the results will be and you have to cooperate and we will improve the scheme to help you to be able to have consistent treatment over a long period of time. 

We will also revise the income criteria to include more households so that a broader range of households can come in under the scheme and can get consistent good long term care.  We will also make the medication more affordable to lower income households.  We will expand the drug list so that it covers more drugs and we will increase subsidies for the more expensive drugs with safeguards so that those with chronic ailments or cancer where chemotherapy can be very expensive, well you will get more help.  I think these are major moves.  We will implement them carefully and as we gain experience with them, we can consider how to fine-tune and how we can take further steps forward.  We have to be very careful because you do not want to end up like the Americans where the government health schemes have eaten up a huge amount of the budget and financially and fiscally it is a big problem for them.  But we can do better, we will do better and MOH is working on it and they will announce the details later on.  So this is one area where we can improve our social safety nets. 

The other area has to do with families who have children with special needs.  They may have dyslexia, they may have autism. They may be ESN, they may be hearing impaired or one of so many conditions but they have long-term special care and education needs. The families will worry not just over the cost but also about helping them overcome their disabilities and develop to the maximum, so that they get the right stimulation, right education and training, right coping strategies. The government is already supporting people doing this.  We support early intervention, we support special education schools.  We also have support in mainstream schools for children with mild learning disabilities like dyslexia. 

The special education schools are doing good work. One example is Pathlight School which happens to be in Teck Ghee.  It looks a beautiful building and it is for children with autism, now it has got about 600 students.  I know because I visited it and I held my National Day observance there this year recently. These are the Pathlight students performing and they presented me a beautiful drawing.  It is a drawing of Joo Chiat shophouses done by one of their students.  So it shows that you may be a special education student but you can have very special abilities too.  And in the right environment, they can thrive. 

But there is a long queue for places in some of the special education schools, and I often meet parents asking me for help to get their children in.  So we will expand capacity in the special education schools and also in the mainstream schools and we will strive to raise the quality of the special education schools so that the children get education which will help them to overcome their disabilities.  We will also increase financial assistance for households who need more help.  This is something which the Ministry of Education will do together with MCYS, consulting the community to work out the best approach because this is something which needs many helping hands. 

The community has to play its part to help to integrate those with special needs into our society. And one good example of a ground-up effort, not depending on the government, is the Joan Bowen café.  Joan Bo Wen is a young lady with special needs.  Her parents wanted to solve her problem; they wanted a safe working environment for her.  So what did they do? They opened a café and they called it the Joan Bowen café.  The café is at Jalan Wangi which is in Sennett Estate and it is to help youths with special needs like autism or Down’s Syndrome so it has got a crew of 16 staff of such kids, actually adults, and they are trained to run the whole café.  Here you see them cooking and this is Joan in the middle, putting the sauce onto the dish. They learn food preparation because they have a manual with pictures and detailed instructions - exactly how to do, each step what to put next and with patient guidance, gradually they gain confidence and they are able to serve customers. You see the customers are happy and the café is successful, so they have launched a second outlet at St Andrew’s Village.  So if you have a chance and you live near there, please drop in and have a drink. 

So we will do our part as the government but the community, parents, VWOs please come forward, help us to carry this and deal with this challenge.  You can do a lot.  We will progressively improve our social safety nets, update our basic schemes whether it is the CPF, whether it is the Medisave schemes and so on.  And we will do more for other groups which have special needs as these issues emerge and we will keep up our effort to help the poor, make sure that nobody is left behind.  But while we do all these things, we have to be very careful that we do not become a welfare state.

Take the example of Greece, you know it is in trouble but why is it in trouble? It is a small country, population is about twice ours, the GDP is about twice ours and its former prime minister Papandreou - a generation ago he built a generous welfare system, protecting the Greeks from competition, giving them jobs in the government, welfare benefits, pension benefits, but it was not affordable.  And so the country has gone broke and has been set back for many decades.  Now Papandreou Jr, the son, is trying to wind back these benefits and put the country right again.  It is very painful, it is going to be very, very difficult and even then they cannot do it by themselves. They are being bailed out by the EU, so far twice, and the problem is not settled. In Greece, if you run into trouble, the EU is there to look after you.  In Singapore, if we run into trouble, who is going to be standing there helping us to get out of the hole? So I think the best thing is: do not get into the hole and maintain a sense of self-reliance and personal responsibility because that is best way for us to succeed.

Our competition is not getting less worldwide; it is getting more competitive than ever. We cannot afford to think that we do not have to try hard because the state is there and if something happens, we can always fall back on the government. Cheng hu wu lui (“the government has money” in Hokkien) - that is the most disastrous thing you can say and the most harmful to Singaporeans because you are misleading them and it will lead to big trouble. Singapore can only succeed if every one of us works hard, does our best and helps others to make progress together. Then we will prosper and we will have the social safety nets which work for us. 

Tonight I have talked about these two sets of policies as examples, putting Singaporeans first and enhancing, working together with each other, to show you how we can keep the thrust of our policies but adjust them to deal with specific problems. We will do it with education, with healthcare, with transport, so many other things, not just once-off but progressively because as we go forward, we will encounter new situations, new problems will come and we will have to respond to them and adjust and make new policies. But where the strategic direction is correct, where we are basically sound and we have a temporary problem to deal with, I think we should have the courage and the honesty to say we are doing the right thing, let us tackle this problem, let us not throw out the baby with the bath water, it is very dangerous.

After the general election, investors have been watching us very closely. They have asked us directly whether Singapore is changing course fundamentally because our society is changing, our economy is changing, our politics are changing. What new Singapore will it be? Will we respond to the pressures of the day and become like so many other countries - short term and reactive - or will we maintain our strengths? As ESM Goh put it yesterday, will our politics remain pragmatic or will we become populist? That is a very direct question, an important question which they have asked us.

EDB just celebrated their 50th anniversary, I went for their events and I met many of the CEOs who came here. I think they came here not just because it was the 50th anniversary but because it was after the general elections and they wanted a sense of how Singapore is, what it is like.  They asked me will Singapore change.  In other words, has Singapore’s political risk gone up?  So I reassured them that we are determined to keep our strengths, that we know what Singapore’s prosperity depends on, what our well-being depends on and Singaporeans know what our well being depends on, and we will maintain the policies which are important for us and therefore useful for them.  At the dinner for the CEOs at the anniversary, this was my message. They listened carefully to me, I think they took me seriously, they accepted that we had the resolve to do this but I can tell you honestly they are also waiting to see what we will do.  If I were them I would also wait to see what Singapore will do.  So make sure we do the right thing, so that they continue to invest, we continue to have good jobs and Singapore continues to prosper because that is what our future depends on.

Looking ahead, we face more complex challenges but we can create an outstanding future together.  What we have today is special, do not take it for granted.  It is an extraordinary achievement, the result of hard work by a united population over many years working with good leaders, making Singapore an exceptional country.  Whether you go to the developed world for a holiday and come back, whether you go to the neighbouring countries in our region and come back, I think if you are honest, you know when you come back to Singapore, you say I am glad to be home because this is a place where there are very few others like it in the world. People know this.  I think our people know this, I think many people in the world know this and our Singapore brand is respected all over the world.  Everywhere we go, we are proud to be Singaporeans.  If you look away from the policies, away from the details, all the fine print of the schemes and the programmes and so on, I think we have one basic choice which we have to make at this turning point and the basic choice is this – what sort of Singapore do we want to be 20 years from now?

Do we want to be still an exceptional country, one which is unique and which people look up to around the world? Or are we content for Singapore to be an ordinary country getting by but no different from so many other cities all over Asia? It is not hard to be ordinary.  You can get by but without a hinterland, it will become just like any other city in Asia, then there is no reason for people to be here to invest here, for talent to stay here or even for able Singaporeans in the next generation to want to remain, and then Singaporeans may leave for bigger and better opportunities elsewhere.  If we want to continue to be exceptional, then you must make a special effort to look ahead, anticipate problems and opportunities to build for the long term, patiently, resolutely, year by year, whether it is good or bad and to keep our politics pragmatic and constructive so that the political basis is there for us to do work which makes sense for Singapore and for us to work together for a common goal. I believe that to keep Singapore exceptional is a goal well worth striving for.  We have shown that we can do it, otherwise we would not be here today and now we have the opportunity to build something which is truly outstanding in Singapore, and as the song (Count On Me Singapore) says, “show the world what Singapore can be”.  We deserve it, our children deserve no less because we want our children to grow up in a city, in a country which they are proud of and which is something special and enables them to flower to the maximum. It is a basis on which we are planning and we are moving on the programmes in Singapore to develop our economy, our education and so on over the next five years.

I will not go through all these programmes but I would like to share with you just some pictures just to give you a sense of the things which we are doing and why they are worth doing.  We are developing new growth industries for example, precision engineering. Companies here used to make TV and radio components, now they produce sophisticated products and this thing which is being made in Singapore is equipment to make semiconductors, so you are not just having semiconductor production lines here where they make wafers and the chips, but you are making the machinery to make the wafers and the chips in Singapore, one level up.  You do not put that in any ordinary country. 

We are developing our infrastructure. You probably have not seen this part of Singapore.  It is deep underground, it is the Jurong Rock Cavern because under Jurong Island, there is a big granite formation. We are excavating caverns in the granite formation to provide storage space to support our petrochemical industry.  You can store oil, you can store petrochemicals, because you have the storage space, so we can have a petrochemical industry here. Because this is Singapore and the industry is confident to be in Singapore, so a hole in the ground in Singapore is valuable whereas elsewhere you can find holes in the ground for free. 

Healthcare - we have built the Khoo Teck Puat Hospital. This is a vegetable garden but it is a vegetable garden on the roof of the Khoo Teck Puat hospital, managed by residents in Nee Soon living nearby, volunteering, a community effort. Keep the roof green, keep the patients cheerful and meanwhile they get some vegetables and fruits and flowers, they have even got coconut trees on the rooftop. The next hospital is coming - Ng Teng Fong Hospital in Jurong – in three years’ time and thereafter, I hope not too long after that, a new hospital in Sengkang. 

In education, we have got many things coming on but I think this picture is the most beautiful. It is not a university. That is ITE College West in Chua Chu Kang, opened this year and it looks like a university and what is inside it is even more interesting. They run classes; they have got cooking classes, culinary classes and this one you see is a French chef and French students. They did not join ITE, they are there because the ITE course is run jointly with the Institut Paul Bocuse in Lyon, France, and here the students and instructor have come from France to spend time in the ITE and they are teaching the students to prepare a three-course meal.  The next ITE is ITE Central and I think the buildings will be better.  It is in Ang Mo Kio Avenue 5 and will be opened by 2013. 

We are building new townships - this one is already there, Punggol 21, Treelodge@ Punggol, but many more flats are coming up in Punggol and Punggol New Town when it is done - this is the artist’s impression of one of the views.  So our new towns, our HDB estates will be different and they will not just be HDB estates but they will be in an urban landscape because we are going to have the greenery all around it. In Marina Bay, Gardens by the Bay is almost complete. It will be done by 2012 and if you go inside, you will have lush greenery and it is not just going to be at Marina Bay, we are going to have parks and gardens at the heartlands also.  This one is Bishan Park and eventually we will have this in many other parks in Singapore, in the west, the east, in the central area and we will link them all up to create a City in the Garden.

So we are building to keep Singapore special and exceptional but even more important than our physical investments is our people - building the sense of ownership and belonging, the instinct to stick together through thick and thin, the drive to surmount every challenge and persevere year after year to make Singapore better.  We will be a more diverse society, it will be a challenge but we have got to strengthen the forces that unite us and overcome the forces that pull us apart. 

We are Singaporeans together on a small island.  We are anchored by our emotional links with family and friends and by our shared sense of our history and our common destiny.  We are not just here, materialised out of nowhere, appeared out of a Transformers movie maybe. We came here somewhere, sometime there was a history to it and it is crucial to remember where we came from, how we got here.  Whether it is Geylang, whether it is Little India, whether it is events which we live through, important milestones - these are the human stories of people, ordinary people who struggled to improve their lives and lived through war or hardship or the turbulent early years of independence, and they achieved extraordinary results with good leadership. They had fulfilling lives and they made Singapore special.

Recently, I attended the launch of Singapore HeritageFest and I made a speech about these human stories and emphasised how important they were. It prompted a response in the TODAY newspaper by a lady, Angeline Koh, who is working on digital storytelling and I think I should read a little bit of what she said because it resonated with her. She said, “What are memories and shared experiences but stories.  And storytelling is what Singapore as a nation needs.  There are unsung heroes in our midst, there are people we meet each day in our homes and in our schools, at work and in play.  Our children need to realise they are heroes in the making.  They have the power to become heroes by the brave and sacrificial choices they make to live well and for the good of others”.  When we talk about history and national education and a sense of belonging, it is not just words and abstract concepts.  It is really the stories of people, real people, what they lived through, what it meant for them. 

That is why MICA is launching a Singapore Memory Project to capture, preserve and showcase these memories. They hope to collect five million memories by 2015 because that is our 50th anniversary.  The stories can come from anybody, any person, any community, any organisation or institution which has experienced Singapore.  Together all these individual stories will weave the tapestry of our nation.  They started in July, so far they have collected 30,000 plus stories and I have not read all of them but I just picked up two memorable accounts to share with you. 

One is by a Mr James Seah who lived through the Bukit Ho Swee fire in 1961.  I read what he said and I looked up some footage and some photos of the event and it brings back to life a very traumatic moment for this young man.  “There was a dark billowing smoke in the sky, the smell was toxic.  People were shouting fire, fire, screaming, shouting.  My mother and I ran as fast as we could to flee away from the burnt houses.  There was a stampede, the older and weaker people were carried by younger and stronger ones.  I noticed my neighbour’s daughter knelt down on the ground to pray, staring at a darkened sky of smoke.  They ended up in Kim Seng School.  The school compound was crowded with thousands of fire victims, police, military personnel, doctors, nurses and helpers.  Tents were erected for registration of fire victims, cooking utensils to cook on the spot and supply meals.  There was also milk powder for babies.  My family visited the fire site and saw the shocking scene of the aftermath of the fire the following day.  Within a week my family was allocated a HDB two-room flat at Margaret Drive.”  That is one aspect of Singapore and how we got here. 

Another story, more cheerful, is the memory of Malaysia Cup 1994 - Singapore versus Pahang and this was by Mr Muhammad Raydza.  I read his account: “I love showing support to the Lions battling it out at Malaysia Cup.  I was 17 years old then, a mere schoolboy.  When we were walking toward the stadium, there was this feeling of euphoria and anxiety, anticipating the match as everywhere we went fans of both sides were in their best country’s colours.  The feeling was simply awesome when the final whistle was blown as if the whole of Singapore was there at Shah Alam.”  I asked if we had the movie clip, so I will share it with you.  Mr Muhammad Raydza’s comment is worth sharing with you too.  He said, “The most memorable moment during the whole Malaysia Cup to me was not the players, instead, the integrity of the fans to come together as one and only in this competition where we see strangers become good friends and buddies become family.  This is what I am definitely hoping for in the next Malaysia Cup, and not so much of the win”. But I hope the Lions win too.

As we strengthen the sense of our common path, we must look ahead to create our shared future.  We aim to be a fair and just society that nurtures and inspires the human spirit, a society that encourages people to go forth and do well for themselves and do good for the community.  It depends on Singaporeans believing that we have created something special and precious here that we must protect and improve, striving not just for material success but for ideals and dreams, serving with passion and the heart as well as the mind.  We place our hopes in our youth who are Singapore’s future.  There are many young people who champion and volunteer for good causes big and small, searching for ways to give back and found many ways to give back. 

One such young man is Mr Haridharan s/o Jaganathan.  He was born with cerebral palsy, but it did not deter him.  He went on to do well for himself and he is making a big effort to help others.  He graduated from Ngee Ann Poly and now he is working for the Ministry of Finance.  This is his office, Vital Shared Services, and he is active in community work in the poly, in the NYC, National Youth Council, in grassroots organisations, even in the Toastmasters Club.  He also mentors other youths to do good for the community.  Last year, he took part in the YOG torch relay and I quote what he said, “my greatest achievement is in adapting to society with what I have and at the same playing my part in making it better, for this society is mine”. 

Another young man who has also committed himself, done well for himself despite difficulties and difficult family circumstances and is contributing back is Mr Muhammad bin Mohd Jauhari.  He is the eldest of five siblings.  His parents divorced when he was nine years old.  His mother who is Malaysian, took him back to Johor and he continued to study in Singapore.  Every day a four-hour bus ride and he had to grow up quickly because the father was not in the family and he was the eldest sibling and he had to be the father figure in the family.  Every day, four o’ clock in the morning, get up, go to school and not only made it on time for lessons but topped his cohort in ITE College West this year, won the LKY Model Student Award and got direct entry into electrical engineering in Ngee Ann Poly second year and he is in Ngee Ann Poly now.  He is an active volunteer in the ITE, he is an active volunteer in the Southwest CDC and also last year in the YOG.  Here is what he said when we asked him: why do you do this?  He said,” the reason I strive to be better is to improve on my own weakness and it is my successes that ensure the well-being of my family.  As a son it is a responsibility I proudly carry and uphold”. 

Young people like Hari and Muhammad embody the Singapore spirit.  They are not alone, there are many more Singaporeans like them, young and perhaps not so young and they are creating opportunity out of adversity, proving we can when others say we cannot, striving to make life better for our fellow men. 

Our task, this generation, is not just to make a beautiful Singapore to pass on to the next generation.  Our task is to engage many more young people like Hari and Muhammad to make building this nation, building Singapore, their own mission so that they embrace this passion, this responsibility to keep on transforming our nation for the better.  We can and we must make this a special place we all call home, where we not only prosper but live in peace and harmony, where we not only have careers and opportunities but friends and families where we share not just burdens and rewards, but our worries and our joys, where we make tomorrow always a little bit better than today.  Let us work together as one people to continue to build a bright future for Singapore which will always be our home. Thank you very much.  Good night.

# 2018

Good evening again. My fellow Singaporeans. We have had a busy year, both at home and internationally

External Developments

Two months ago, we hosted the first ever meeting between a US President and a DPRK Chairman, Mr Donald Trump and Mr Kim Jong Un. Singapore was just the host; we were not involved in the discussions. Still, we had a big responsibility to ensure that the Summit proceeded smoothly and safely.

Why did the US and the DPRK choose Singapore to host the Summit? I think they considered us a serious and reliable partner. We are friendly and straight with all parties. And both trusted us to have the infrastructure and capability to provide a safe and secure environment. It was a daunting task, but we rose to the challenge
We welcomed our guests with ‘Uniquely Singapore’ touches of warmth and hospitality. You may have seen the Sentosa cannons, barrels decorated with flowers and olive branches. SDC has good staff. We found and assigned Korean-speaking officers to the North Korean delegation. We packed goodie bags for 2,500 international journalists, with thoughtful items like bottled water and a portable fan to beat the heat. We kept the journalists well fed, with meals and snacks from local sponsors. We even had laksa flavoured cookies. 

After the Summit, we held appreciation events for the officers who had worked so hard. I attended several of them. Tonight I want to thank the officers and your families once again, personally. You did not just answer the call of duty. You gave your best and more. Many of you worked 24/7. It was Ramadan, and Muslim officers were fasting. Some officers even had to abort leave plans, and cut short family vacations at the last minute. At the Home Team party, I chatted with a Gurkha Contingent officer, who had been on duty outside the St Regis Hotel. He told me how proud he had felt when a woman leaned over the crowd barrier to tell him: “Thank you for keeping Singapore safe.”

I would also like to thank all Singaporeans who made an extra effort to show what Singapore could do. We received postcards from a class of Primary 2 students from Methodist Girls’ Primary School (MGS). The kids had written to thank Singapore for having “lighted the world” by hosting the Summit. They reminded us that “when Singaporeans work together, we can do great things”. I am heartened that even our eight year olds followed the news and knew what we were doing.

Organising the Summit brought us all together, supporting and cheering one another on. We have every reason to feel proud of ourselves. Well done, Team Singapore.

External Environment

We hope that the Summit has helped to defuse tensions on the Korean Peninsula. But Korea is not the only trouble spot in the world. The world situation has become much more uncertain. Openness, globalisation and free trade, have all come under pressure. The US used to promote free trade, and the free movement of people. But now, many Americans are questioning the benefits of this approach. They feel that other countries are taking advantage of them. Thus, the US has made “rebalancing trade” a top priority, rebalancing country by country, rebalancing item by item. It has unilaterally imposed tariffs on imports from other countries – the EU, Canada and Mexico, and especially China. These countries are retaliating, imposing their own tariffs on US exports like soybeans, bourbon, blue jeans and Harley-Davidson motorcycles. They want to inflict maximum pain on Trump’s supporters, who grow or make these things, hoping to force the US to back off.

This tit-for-tat affects business confidence, undermines the multilateral trading system, and threatens global prosperity. There are no winners in a trade war. Small and open economies are especially vulnerable. And Singapore will suffer collateral damage.

Beyond economics, world peace and security, and stability are at risk. The trade frictions have eroded trust, and sharpened tensions and rivalries between countries. The US and Europeans have long been firm friends and allies, but now, they are arguing fiercely over trade and defence spending. China and the US have the most important bilateral relationship in the world. They are interdependent and they also need to work closely together on global issues like climate change. But the Trump Administration has named China as America’s “strategic competitor” and President Xi Jinping has warned that China will punch back and will not “turn the other cheek”.

This is an unprecedented situation. Henry Kissinger recently told the Financial Times: “We are in a very, very grave period for the world”. We cannot be confident that the major powers will continue to work with one another, and that the existing international system which has held the world together for so long will still hold. We do not know whether after a while new rules and norms for international cooperation will form, or whether there will be prolonged tension and suspicion, mutual rivalries and hostile blocs. We are therefore at a turning point. We hope all countries will act with restraint and wisdom, overcome the current challenges, and find a new way to move forward together.

Malaysia

In an uncertain world, ASEAN is all the more important to us. We have to strengthen ASEAN and work on our relationships with all our ASEAN partners, especially our two closest neighbours, Indonesia and Malaysia.

Indonesia will hold elections next year. They have just decided on the Presidential candidates. They will be preoccupied with election campaigning for the next few months.

I have worked well with President Jokowi. We have wide-ranging and mutually beneficial cooperation with Indonesia. I hope this will continue. In October, President Jokowi will be hosting me to our annual Leaders’ Retreat, this time in Bali. We will be discussing ways to do more together.

Malaysia has just had its General Election. For the first time ever, it has changed its governing coalition, from Barisan Nasional to Pakatan Harapan. Malaysia has a new generation of leaders, a combination of young talent and experienced hands. Of course, Prime Minister Mahathir is not new to us. We have worked with him before, the last time he was PM for 22 years until 2003. That is when this picture was taken, which is why I look with more black hair.  We completed several important projects with Malaysia under Dr Mahathir, including the Second Link at Tuas and the Linggiu Dam in Johor. We have worked with some of his coalition partners and Ministers too. Anwar Ibrahim was my counterpart as Dr Mahathir’s Deputy and also Finance Minister. Home Minister Muhyiddin Yassin was the Johor Menteri Besar when we built the Linggiu Dam.

In May, soon after the Malaysian Election, I visited Dr Mahathir in Putrajaya. I also met DPM Wan Azizah and Anwar Ibrahim. I had good meetings with all three of them. I told Dr Mahathir that I wanted to work with him to take our bilateral relationship forward. He agreed that we should, because we are each other’s closest neighbours.

Dr Mahathir and his team are determined to review and change many of the policies set by the previous Malaysian Government. I appreciate their reasons. But some of their reviews affect Singapore’s ongoing projects with Malaysia, including the High Speed Rail (HSR) and the Rapid Transit System (RTS) Link to Johor. We entered into these two projects in good faith, after careful negotiations, because they benefitted both countries. Now Malaysia wants to defer the HSR. Khaw Boon Wan has met Azmin Ali, Malaysia’s Economic Affairs Minister, to understand Malaysia’s intentions, and to find a constructive way forward. Both the HSR and the RTS Link have legally binding Bilateral Agreements. These set out clearly the duties of each party, and what happens if either party wants to change or to terminate the agreements. Both sides have to carry out what has been agreed to, unless we mutually agree to vary the terms.

Dr Mahathir has also said that he wants to review our 1962 Water Agreement. This is not a new issue. It had come up before, when Dr Mahathir was previously PM. You know Singapore’s view – the Water Agreement is sacrosanct. We must proceed strictly in accordance with its terms. To avoid any misunderstanding, Foreign Minister Vivian recently reiterated our position in Parliament. So that is why I am giving one sentence here. The full statement – look it up on the internet.

We have worked well with Malaysia over the years. We have done substantial projects with successive governments and brought tangible benefits to both Singaporeans and Malaysians. I hope that with Dr Mahathir and his new team, we can build on our deep partnership, look ahead, and make further progress together. Ultimately, the fundamentals of our relationship with Malaysia have not changed. We are closely bound by ties of kinship and history, geography and economics. We need to work together to tackle common challenges. When our interests diverge, we must find constructive ways to resolve our differences. If Singapore-Malaysia relations stay stable and close, we can pursue win-win cooperation and each focus on our own domestic priorities. We have many of them. So do the Malaysians.

Domestic Developments

Although our external environment has become more uncertain, Singapore’s economy is still growing steadily. Efforts to transform our economy are making progress. Our businesses, including SMEs, have been improving their productivity and expanding both in and outside Singapore. Our workers, supported by unions and employers, are working hard to upgrade their skills, and to seize new job opportunities. We are on the right track. The economic restructuring will lay a strong basis for our future growth.

Earlier in my Chinese speech, I spoke about cost of living pressures – what causes them, what the Government is doing, and how you can stretch your own dollar. I explained how we are helping people cope with water and electricity bills through U-Save rebates. I described our changing lifestyle, how handphones, infant formula, and eating out, among other things, have impacted families, and what you can do to lessen your burden and what the Government is doing.

Beyond these, three major expenditure items – housing, education, and healthcare – affect our cost of living in a big way, at different points in our lives. When young couples buy an HDB flat, it is your first financial commitment. When you start a family and have children, preschool fees can add up. When you grow older, medical bills can be unpredictable and significant, and can be a burden on your family.

Therefore, housing, education and healthcare are three areas that the Government is very focused on. We will spare no effort to ensure you can afford them. I have often spoken about education at National Day Rallies, and last year I spoke quite a bit about preschool education. This year, I will talk about healthcare and housing, starting with healthcare.

Healthcare

Singaporeans are indeed spending more on healthcare. Partly because we have more advanced treatment options and better equipment, more sophisticated equipment. But a bigger reason is because Singaporeans are living longer, and growing older, which means we are likely to have more episodes of illness and more medical problems to treat.

How have we kept healthcare spending affordable for Singaporeans? We have our 3Ms – MediSave, MediShield and MediFund. At the same time, Government provides heavy subsidies – up to 80 percent in our hospitals, and also for primary and long term care. This framework has worked well for many years. It has produced good healthcare outcomes. It has held national healthcare spending low and also kept healthcare affordable for you.

In recent years, we have made further changes to help you with your medical costs. First, we upgraded MediShield to MediShield Life. A big move to protect Singaporeans from unexpected large medical bills – big ones. The payouts are more generous, and there is no lifetime claim limit. You enjoy lifelong protection, even if you have pre-existing conditions or you were previously uninsured. If you suddenly have to go to the   hospital or undergo a major operation, MediShield Life will help you. Last year alone, close to 200,000 Singaporeans benefitted from MediShield Life, and the payouts amounted to over $800 million.

Second, for outpatient expenses, we introduced the Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS). At GP clinics, your CHAS card entitles you to generous subsidies, especially for the lower income. Dr Lily Neo, who is a GP, told me that after the CHAS was introduced, she saw more elderly patients. She said that our old folks are very resilient and generally put off seeing the doctor until they cannot tahan anymore. But because of CHAS, they now come to her earlier, which is better and she can treat them before their conditions worsen.

CHAS has worked well. As we grow older, more of us will have chronic conditions, like diabetes or high blood pressure or cholesterol. But we can continue to live a full life if we manage these conditions – by taking good care of ourselves, eating healthily, taking our medications regularly and following up with our family doctor. I think all of us will appreciate a little bit of help with the regular medical bills for such chronic conditions. Today, CHAS covers middle and lower income Singaporeans. We will now extend CHAS to all Singaporeans with chronic conditions, regardless of income. The benefits will continue to be tiered according to income. MOH will announce the details later on.

For those who visit the polyclinic instead of the GP, I have good news too. MOH has been building and upgrading polyclinics and medical centres across the island. For example, in Punggol and Kampung Admiralty amongst others. Punggol Polyclinic opened last November. It focuses on women’s and children’s health, to cater to the young families living nearby. Admiralty Medical Centre is at Kampung Admiralty, where many elderly residents live, and where I recorded my National Day Message. It provides health education, eye checks and fall-risk screening for the elderly, at their doorstep.

I also recently opened the new Ang Mo Kio polyclinic. It is bigger and better, with more and improved services. Here you see, they have a special dentist chair, so you can put a wheelchair patient in and the wheelchair patient does not have to get up and be manoeuvred onto the dentist chair separately. It is a great help for old people. There is a senior care centre offers day care, rehabilitation and home care services, saving elderly and less mobile residents trips to the hospital. My residents, as you can see, are very happy. In fact, AMK Polyclinic has become so popular that the staff told me they are getting “medical tourists”. Not from overseas, but they come from Yishun, and even Bedok and Jurong. All of you are very welcome to Ang Mo Kio. But actually you do not have to worry, because we are building more polyclinics across Singapore – in Sembawang, Eunos, Kallang and Bukit Panjang by 2020 and then a few years later by 2023, in Nee Soon Central and Tampines North. Some of these are to upgrade and improve existing ones. And we will make sure there are affordable, accessible, high quality primary care all over Singapore

Third, we have improved financial support for long term care. We have seen our own parents or grandparents getting old, growing weaker, gradually becoming unable to take care of themselves. They can no longer feed themselves, dress themselves, or move around independently. They struggle to perform these Activities of Daily Living or you call it ADLs. Activities that when you are young, you take for granted. It is a little bit sad, you see it happen. But that is life. One day it will happen to us. So we have the ElderShield scheme. If you cannot do three of these ADLs, ElderShield pays out a monthly sum of $300 or $400, for up to 6 years. MOH has revamped ElderShield fundamentally, and we will soon have CareShield Life. CareShield Life will pay out significantly more – at least $600 a month and it will pay out for as long as you live, not just six years. The scheme will start in 2020. It will cover all Singaporeans born in 1980 and younger. Even people with an existing disability will be covered. The Government will subsidise the premiums for lower- and middle-income families, so that these families can pay their share out of Medisave. If you are older – born before 1980 – you can also to choose to join CareShield Life. It is not compulsory, but you can join and I hope you will do so. Why? Because you will get a generous subsidy to help pay the premiums. The Government will co-pay, so you are getting a good deal. But really because it will give you and your family more peace of mind. It is something which you probably will need. Gan Kim Yong tells me that this is the most difficult of his healthcare schemes to explain to the public. So he commissioned me to do it for him tonight. Young, healthy people cannot imagine themselves being old and disabled. When you are young, sometimes it feels like you will be young forever, but alas it is not so. If you wait until you are older before thinking about disability insurance, by then the premiums will be higher, and you may no longer even be eligible because you may already have conditions and not be insurable.

Singaporeans are living longer, but unfortunately our additional years are not always healthy years.  As many as 1 in 2 of us will, at some point in our lives, no longer be able to perform three ADLs. Just think of the old folks you know, and you will see that this is the reality. This is why I believe CareShield Life can help all of us. It is offered to you. I hope you will take it up.

These are some of the major changes to our healthcare financing over the last few years. We want all Singaporeans to have access to affordable, high quality healthcare. No one should be denied medical care because they cannot afford it and that is my commitment to you.

We have taken special care of elderly Singaporeans. Four years ago, I launched the Pioneer Generation Package (PGP). The PGP was for the group of Singaporeans born in 1949 or earlier, who came of age when the country was in our early years of development. They were a special generation, who sacrificed much to bring up their families. They did not have good educational opportunities. Most started working early, had low-paying jobs, and could not put aside much for old age. They spent most of their working lives in Third World Singapore; only to retire in First World Singapore. Understandably, they were worried about their healthcare needs. We implemented the PGP to recognise the Pioneer Generation for their sacrifices and to support them in their silver years. So far, we have spent more than $1.3 billion of the $8 billion we set aside for the PGP. 450,000 Pioneers have benefitted – and they fully deserve it.

When we introduced the PGP, we knew that Singaporeans a little younger than the Pioneers who would just miss out. We gave those who were born between 1950 and 1959 annual MediSave top-ups – $100 or $200, depending on their circumstances. Nevertheless, a MediSave top up is not quite the same thing as the PGP. We have not forgotten this group. They lived through the tumultuous years of the 1950s and early 1960s. First came the struggle for independence from the British. Domestically, Singapore politics was fiercely fought, over different visions of the colony’s future. In 1959, Singapore gained internal self-government, one big step towards independence. The PAP won the General Election that year, and formed the Government for the first time. Then came the split with the Communists, Merger with Malaysia, and then Separation and unexpected Independence – alone.

For those born in the 1950s, these were indelible, formative experiences that shaped them for life. They were too young to participate in events but most were old enough to sense the electricity in the air, to share the excitement of the changes, to feel the hope of a brighter tomorrow. They saw the posters and banners that festooned the streets, and were stirred by the rallying cry “Merdeka.” One word that meant so much – liberation, freedom, independence. One word that expressed the determination and the passion, the ambitions and aspirations, of a people who were roused and on the move. And seldom were the people more roused than on 3 June 1959, when Mr Lee Kuan Yew, newly elected Prime Minister, addressed a huge rally at the Padang. As he told the crowd from the City Hall steps: “Once in a long while in the history of a people there comes a moment of great change. Tonight is such a moment in our lives… We begin a new chapter in the history of Singapore.” Most memorable was his call to action, captured in this clip. You have seen it. You have heard it. But it is still electrifying. 

This group born in the 1950s are the Merdeka Generation. In Chinese, 立国一代, and in Malay, of course, Generasi Merdeka. There are 500,000 of the Merdeka Generation today. I am proud to be one of them.

Having lived through the battles and upheavals of the Merdeka struggle, and seen how their parents have scraped and slogged for them, when the Merdeka Generation grew up, they understood instinctively what was at stake. They accepted hardships, made sacrifices, answered the call of duty, and worked with their leaders to build a better tomorrow. The men were among the earliest batches called up for National Service. They were the first of the SAF – the Army, Navy and Air Force. Many, especially girls, did not complete their education. They came out to work early, to support the family and younger siblings. Some joined the workforce amidst economic uncertainty and high unemployment, as the British Forces withdrew from Singapore. All started working when wages were still low. Together with the Pioneer Generation, the Merdeka Generation contributed to building Singapore, to making Merdeka – Independence – a success.

Compared to the Pioneer Generation, the Merdeka Generation are better off. They were born later, and benefitted from an extra decade of economic growth. They were generally better educated than the Pioneers, especially the younger ones. The Merdeka Generation earned more over their lifetimes, and accumulated more CPF savings, because in the early 80s, wages increased sharply. CPF rates also went up significantly. But of course, the cohorts that came after them did even better. As we improved the education system, year by year, more of the younger cohorts earned diplomas and degrees, and found higher skilled and better paid jobs. People stopped dropping out of school because they needed to work. They could afford school. They could get the education. They could invest in their children for a lifetime, and therefore, they earned more, and saved more

Most of the Merdeka Generation today are in their 60s. They have either left the workforce, or will soon be retiring. Many have similar healthcare concerns as the Pioneers. They are looking at their CPF savings and MediSave accounts, worried about having enough for their medical needs as they grow older. I think we owe something to them.

The Government will work out a “Merdeka Generation Package”. The Merdeka Generation Package will help this group to meet their medical expenses. We will announce the details next year. It will cover similar areas as the PG Package. For example, outpatient subsidies, MediSave top ups, MediShield Life premium subsidies, and payouts for long term care. The benefits will not be as large as for the Pioneer Generation, who had much less advantage in life. But the Merdeka Generation Package will go some way to relieve their healthcare worries. More importantly, it will show our appreciation for the Merdeka Generation and their contributions.

Recap

In summary, we are making big changes to our healthcare financing framework. We have strengthened the 3Ms, and introduced MediShield Life. We will soon enhance CHAS and introduce CareShield Life. We implemented the PG Package. We will set aside a significant sum to implement a Merdeka Generation Package. This is not yet the logo but it is a first approximation, courtesy of my very good team from Nanyang Polytechnic. Our schemes are now more comprehensive and inclusive, and Singaporeans can have more peace of mind that their healthcare needs are well taken care of. By the way, if you look carefully at this, you will find this is a yellow CHAS, which is a different colour from the orange ones and maybe there is a hint down there.

Housing

Apart from healthcare, many Singaporeans are also concerned about housing. But unlike healthcare, housing is not a simple matter of keeping prices down. Because house prices affect different people differently and the same person differently, at different times. When you want to buy a house, you want prices to be low. When you own a house or want to sell it, you want prices to be high. So, it is not possible to please everybody.

Still, Singapore’s housing policies have been uniquely successful. We are the only major city in the world where nearly every young couple getting married can afford to buy their first home immediately. In other major cities, young couples can only hope to rent a flat, and the monthly rent can cost up to 40% of their household income. And in some cities, you do not rent a flat, you rent a space. Or sometimes a tube, because that is all you can afford. Whereas in Singapore, you buy a flat, you pay for most of your flat out of your CPF, and the flat is yours.

Take Yong Kuang and Sabrina for example. They got married recently, and bought a four room BTO flat in Punggol. They paid a nett price of $345,000 for their four room flat, after HDB housing grants. This was less than five times their annual income.  As a rule of thumb, housing costing about five times annual income is what is counted as affordable and in this case, they had it less than five times. Having worked for some years already, they had saved enough in their CPF for the down payment. Now their monthly CPF contributions are enough to pay their instalments. So they have not had to pay any cash out of pocket for their flat, either for the down payment or the instalments.

Yong Kuang and Sabrina’s story is not unusual. 80 per cent of us live in public housing. It is the Singapore norm. It is not just for poor families, like elsewhere, but for a wide range of Singaporeans from all walks of life. Public housing in Singapore is really “national housing”. This did not happen by chance. We made it happen through sound policies, unwavering political resolve, and the strong support of Singaporeans. Our founding fathers started the Home Ownership Scheme in 1964. They wanted every citizen to benefit from the country’s growth and prosperity, and to have a valuable stake that would be theirs that they would defend, if necessary, with their lives. As a result, generations of Singaporeans have been uplifted by home ownership.

Take for example, a first generation resident in Ang Mo Kio. His four room flat would now be about 40 years old, and can fetch more than $400,000 in the resale market. In a good location, probably more. When he bought the flat 40 years ago, how much do you think he paid for it? $25,000. Even accounting for inflation, this is a huge appreciation. This is how we have enabled many Singaporeans to have a substantial asset to your name, even lower income households. In fact, if you take our homeowners who are 90 per cent of the population, and you look at the poorest one-fifth of homeowners, each have on average $200,000 of wealth in his or her HDB flat. $200,000 of wealth. That means you take the value of the flat, you subtract off his mortgage unpaid and he still has $200,000 to his name. This does not happen anywhere else.

Young couples buying a flat today probably would not see such a huge appreciation as the Ang Mo Kio resident who bought the flat 40 years ago, because our economy is maturing and it cannot grow as fast anymore. But you still get a good headstart because the Government helps you out with a subsidised flat or housing grants, and often both. And as long as our economy grows, the value of the flat will go up for many years, just not as dramatically

Why 99 years?

The oldest flats in Ang Mo Kio are about 40 years old. Sometimes residents ask what will happen to their flats as time passes and their leases run down. Will their flats still hold value? What options do they have? Why are their leases for 99 years? Can they be longer? Actually, 99 years is a very long time. Let’s say you buy a new flat from HDB in your early 30s. At the end of 99 years, you will be 130+ years old – and probably would not need this flat anymore. If you have children, they will also be very old, almost as old as the flat itself in their 80s or 90s. And if you have grandchildren, your grandchildren will already be grandparents. So, 99 years is a very long time.

In particular, when you retire, after living in your flat for 30 or 40 years, it will still have a good 60+ years of lease left. That is long enough for it to retain substantial value, and be a good retirement nest egg as you can see with the Ang Mo Kio example I gave you just now. You can continue living in the flat, rent out a room for income if needed, and one day, pass on the flat down to your children. Or you can right-size, sell it and move to a smaller unit. Or you can go for Lease Buyback and return the remaining lease to HDB, then use the money you get back for retirement. I explained how all this works in a previous National Day Rally, 2014. If you look up the clips on the YouTube, you will still find them there. But we can make things better. We can do several things to help residents monetise their older flats. We can expand the Lease Buyback scheme. We can do things to improve the liquidity of the resale market. That means to make it easier for people to buy and sell old flats, and MND is working on this.

What if you had bought a resale flat instead? Well, our oldest flats are at most 52 years old, so you have at least another 47 years left of your lease, which is still a long time. Very few of today’s HDB owners will outlive their leases. HDB estimates that it will happen to less than 2 per cent of households, including those who have bought resale flats. So it is not likely to happen to you. It could happen, but not likely. It could happen to your children if they inherit your flat. But this should not be a problem if your children buy their own BTO flat, with its own 99-year lease, as many do. Because then an inheritance for them would be a gift and a bonus. And even if you have to return your old flat at the end of its lease, do not worry because the Government will help you get another flat to live in. It may be a BTO flat from HDB with a fresh 99-year lease, if you are eligible for another one. It may be a resale flat on a shorter and cheaper lease. Or it may be a 2R Flexi flat for retirement. There are different options, depending on your needs and what you can afford. But whichever option you choose, you will have to pay for the lease. This is only fair, because you bought the original flat knowing when the lease would run out, and knowing that the flat would then have to be returned to HDB.

There is one fundamental reason why HDB leases are for 99 years and that is, we need to be fair to future generations. Let me explain. HDB sells the flat to you for 99 years. You own it, and you can pass it on for one or two generations. After that, the flat returns to the state, the Government redevelops the land, and builds new flats for future generations. This is the only way to recycle the land and ensure that all our descendants can buy new BTO flats of their own. If instead the Government had sold you the flat on freehold, that means in perpetuity. Sooner or later we would run out of land to build new flats for future generations. The owners would pass their flats down to some of their descendants, many generations into the future. Those lucky enough to have a flat, they become flat owner. Those not lucky enough to inherit a property would get nothing. So our society would split into property owners and those who cannot afford a property. I think that would be most unequal, and socially divisive. So, that is why 99 year leases are not just for HDB flats. In fact, for private housing also, the Government only sells land on 99 year leases.

There is also a practical reason why we cannot extend the leases easily. If you look at older buildings today, some look rather worn down, even before they are 50 years old. Some condominiums are like that, private property. After a century, I am sure the mechanical and electrical systems will be obsolete. The concrete will have deteriorated in our tropical climate. And even if we could fix all that, the recurrent maintenance costs would be very high. So it is better to let the leases expire, take the blocks back, demolish them and rebuild afresh. We may keep a few blocks which have historical or heritage value, or sentimental reason, or to remind people what the old days were like, but these should be the exception. For the others, we can rebuild newer, better, more liveable flats, blocks, and townships, more suited to what our grandchildren and great-grandchildren will want to live in. Today if I offer you to live in a 100-year old flat, I do not think there will be many takers because you want the mod cons. You want the lifts. You want the power supply. You want the modern sanitation. You want the convenience. You want the finishes, the styles. You want to be up to date. I think our grandchildren will also want to be up to date. It is better we take back. We rebuild. Singapore progresses while keeping an essence of its history and soul.  That is why when the leases expire, the flats will have to return to the state.

HIP Expansion

There are still many decades before the first HDB leases expire. As the flats grow older, the Government will help you to keep them in good condition. We do this through HDB’s upgrading programmes. We started with the Main Upgrading Programme (MUP) in the 1990s. This one happens to be in my own constituency and you can see each one of these red bars is one lift tower. This is one block, this is one block. It’s a block with seven lift towers at government expense, upgraded MUP and LUP together. Later, we replaced the MUP with the the Home Improvement Programme (HIP). The HIP has been very popular. It is an essential upgrade. We fix up maintenance problems, like spalling concrete, ceiling leaks, and damaged pipes. This is the new toilet after it has been upgraded. We upgrade the electrical supply too. This is a substation. Because more families have air-conditioners, washing machines, computers, and now personal mobility devices (PMDs), needing to be charged.

The HIP scheme is heavily subsidised. The Government pays up to 95 per cent, so residents pay as little as a few hundred dollars for the upgrading. Not surprising that after upgrading, the flat value usually goes up. We launched the HIP 10 years ago. The final batch of HIP flats will be announced by next year. So within a few years, all flats eligible for HIP will have been balloted. Hopefully, passed, executed and upgraded. That means altogether 450,000 flats upgraded under MUP plus HIP.

Now, HIP covers flats built up to 1986. We launched the programme a decade ago. So the flats which missed qualifying for HIP are also now starting to show their age. I know many HDB residents in these younger flats are also hoping for an upgrading. In estates like Yishun, Tampines and Jurong, there are flats built both before and after the 1986 cut-off. So people ask, why next door got HIP, my flat got no HIP. And then there is Pasir Ris, where residents started collecting keys in 1987. So, DPM Teo Chee Hean used to remind the Ministers regularly that Pasir Ris has not had any HIP projects. And I would console him regularly that Pasir Ris flats do not need any HIP yet, they don’t need HIP yet, you are new, very good. But still he said, my residents are waiting anxiously.

Now that the oldest Pasir Ris flats are 30 years old, they are no longer quite so new. Wear and tear is starting to show, so I am very happy to announce that we will expand the HIP and HIP will now include blocks built up to 1997. That means another 230,000 flats will benefit. So Pasir Ris will get HIP, the older flats. And so will Yishun, Tampines, Jurong and a number of other estates.

New HIP II

Beyond HIP, what more can we do as our flats grow older? The expanded HIP will include flats built up to 1997. In other words, the flats will get HIP about 30 years after they were built. After upgrading, these flats should be good for another 30 to 40 years. By that time, the flats will be 60 to 70 years old, and I expect they will be showing their age again. We are determined not to let our public housing degenerate into ragged, squalid slums, which has happened in many other cities. So we should do a second round of upgrading, at about the 60 to 70-year mark. Let us call this HIP II. 60 to 70 years old. HIP II will keep the flats safe and liveable, and also help them retain their value as their leases run down. It should see the flats through to the end of their leases. So in short, every HDB flat can expect to be upgraded twice during their lease. Once when they are about 30 years old, through the MUP or HIP, and a second time through HIP II, when they are about 60-70 years old. The first flats will reach 60-70 years old about 10 years from now. So that is when we plan to launch the HIP II programme. Akan datang.

HIP II is a huge financial commitment for the Government. If you own a private property, you are fully responsible for its upkeep and upgrading. But because HDB is public housing, the Government will upgrade each HDB flat not once, but twice during its lifespan. Furthermore, the Government will help you pay most of the upgrading cost. The first HIP will cost the Government more than $4 billion. HIP II will probably cost even more, because the flats will be twice as old by then. But it is well justified, and we will do it so long as MOF has the money.

SERS

I know what some of you are thinking. HIP and HIP II are fine if I want to stay on in my flat. But what if I want to move out? Can I get SERS – the Selective En bloc Redevelopment Scheme? SERS is a very good scheme for estate rejuvenation. It brings new residents into the estate, often young families, who inject vitality into the community. I have two SERS projects in Teck Ghee, and recently I visited Teck Ghee Parkview. It replaced the BTO blocks which came into the SERS site. The new flats have made a noticeable difference to Teck Ghee – the estate is livelier, more children are running around, more young couples like this one whom I visited. It has cheered up the neighbourhood. Now we have more babies in Teck Ghee, some even able to dance with their mothers. So yes, SERS is indeed one option, if your flat happens to be SERS-ed and selected. But SERS is a very limited scheme. It is meant for selected HDB blocks or precincts, which have high development value which we can unlock. What does that mean? Take Tanglin Halt for example. It is in Queenstown. It is our first HDB township. It was not built optimally. The precincts were not always well laid out. There are low rise flats, the flats have layouts where there are large surface car parks, empty spaces, odd leftover spaces. So if you take it all back and redevelop it completely, Tanglin Halt is being SERS-ed, you can use the space better, you can create denser housing, greener environments. So from something like this, you can go to something like this, 40 years’ change or 50 years change. We are redeveloping Tanglin Halt through SERS, using the space better, and creating denser housing and greener environments. It makes economic sense in such cases for the Government to take back the flats early and redevelop the site. Because there is a lot of value unlocked, we share this value with residents through generous compensation. And with generous compensation, we can make the acquisition compulsory. In other words, HDB decides on SERS, and residents do not get to vote 

However, HDB estimates that only around 5% of flats are suitable for SERS. There will be a few more SERS projects to come, but many projects with high redevelopment potential have already been done. Because HDB chose the promising ones and did them first.

VERS

So what about the flats that do not get SERS? Well, HDB has been studying this intensively, and I have good news to share tonight. More households will be able to benefit from redevelopment before their leases expire. Why? Because the Government has good reason to take back more flats, and redevelop them as they grow older, before 99 years are up. Let me explain. When HDB towns grow older, and the leases in the estates are nearing expiry, we have to redevelop the towns. We want to do this in an orderly way. In the early years, because of the housing shortage, HDB often built in a tremendous rush. Several older estates were built within short periods, especially in the 1970s and 1980s.   Marine Parade between 1974-1976 – within three years. Ang Mo Kio and Bedok, after that, 1975-1981 – within six to seven years. This one is Marine Parade. Therefore, if we do not plan ahead, 99 years later, all the leases in such towns will expire around the same time, and all the flats will be returned to the state within a few years. We will have to find new homes for a lot of people at once. HDB will have to tear down and rebuild the old flats in a hurry, just like when we first built Marine Parade, Ang Mo Kio and Bedok. I do not think that is a good idea. The towns will become construction sites all over again, with cranes all over the place. I think we should redevelop our old towns over 20 to 30 years, rather than within four to five years, progressively. That means starting when the oldest flats reach about 70 years old onwards. So some flats, you redevelop when you get to 70 years old, some 75, some 80 and you stretch it out over 20, 30 years and progressively do things in a measured and considered way. Then, just like with SERS, the estate and the community can be renewed progressively. There will be more new and younger residents moving in and the estate will become more vibrant. Those moving out will have somewhere to go to, and those staying will have rejuvenation to look forward to. This is why it makes sense for the Government to take back flats progressively over several decades, starting from about 70 years onwards, and stage out the redevelopment.

We will need a new scheme for this. Of course, we will compensate the residents whose flats are taken back early. We will also help them get another flat to live in, just like we would if their leases had run out. But the terms will be less generous than SERS, because there will less financial upside. There is social merit in it. There is community merit in it but there is not so much financial upside. Therefore, the scheme will be voluntary. I will call it VERS – Voluntary Early Redevelopment Scheme. So if you don’t get SERS-ed, you can hope to be VERS-ed. Residents in the precinct will have to vote for VERS, just like for HIP. If the residents vote yes, we will proceed. The Government will buy back the whole precinct, all the flats and redevelop, and residents can use their proceeds to help pay for another flat. If the residents vote no, then they can continue to live in their flats until their leases run out.

This is a long term plan. We will not start doing VERS for another 20 years. We need time to work out how to select the precincts, how to pace the redevelopments out, the specific terms of the Government’s offer and so on. We also need to study how to afford VERS for the long term. But I think such a scheme is necessary, so we will start planning for VERS now.

Recap

I have covered quite a bit of ground on housing. So let me do a quick recap. There is an examination later. First, we will expand HIP to upgrade 230,000 additional flats built between 1987 and 1997. This will happen when the flats are about 30 years old, and this will start soon. Second, we will do HIP II to upgrade flats a second time. This is a big project. This will happen when the flats reach 60-70 years old. HIP II will start in about 10 years’ time. Third, we will have VERS to progressively redevelop precincts in ageing housing estates. This will happen from about the 70th year onwards. VERS will start 20 years from now.

Rebuilding Singapore

Eleven years ago, at NDR 2007, I showed a CGI fly-through of what we hoped Punggol would look like one day. Some of you may remember watching it. At that time, Punggol 21 Plus was still just a gleam in the eyes of our HDB planners. Recently, Lawrence Wong showed me a new fly-through of Punggol, this time using a drone – real life, not CGI. Let me show you the video. We start from outer space. We fly in. We proposed to create a Punggol Waterway, to build a town on both sides and if you fly along the waterway, this is what we thought it would look like. And 10 years, and a lot of hard work later, you cross the bridge and it becomes reality. This is HDB housing. There are parks. There are green areas. There are schools. This is a commercial development. It is Oasis (Terraces) – the Punggol Polyclinic is there. This is Waterway Cascadia, another HDB development. And back to the future. This is the Punggol Digital District which is adjacent to the SIT campus, Singapore Institute of Technology. Thank you for joining my guided tour.

What my Government envisioned more than 10 years ago, we have made reality. This has been the story of Singapore for more than 50 years. We said this would be a metropolis — and so it came to pass. We will continue to transform our city, our whole island. We will never let Singapore become a shabby shadow of some past glory, but always keep it a vibrant and attractive place to live. We are creating green corridors, expanding Changi Airport, moving PSA to Tuas, and building a new city centre on the Southern Waterfront. We are planning and building new HDB towns. Bidadari is already under construction. Next is Tengah in the west and later,  Caldecott, each with unique concepts. Later, after Paya Lebar Airbase has moved to Changi, we will redevelop the eastern part of the island. And in 30 to 40 years’ time, we will rebuild our existing towns into the future Marine Parade; the future Ang Mo Kio; the future Bedok, and others. Each development will learn from the previous one and be even better. We are designing each town so that the community remains youthful and vibrant, and the facilities serve a wide range of needs and interests, for now and the future, townships for all ages. Just as we turned Punggol 21 Plus from CGI to reality, we will make these other plans come true. Then future PMs can show them off at their NDRs too. HDB will be very busy. They may have to change their name to HRB – the Housing Redevelopment Board. Indeed, we will never be done building Singapore.

Conclusion

Tonight, I have spoken about major shifts in our external environment. I have described our plans to improve healthcare and public housing. These are fundamental commitments by my Government to you. They are ambitious endeavours, and will require large expenditures. These schemes will stretch over 50 years and more. Several generations, and many General Elections. But we are planting the seeds now – conceiving the plans, investing the resources, building the institutions. The benefits will be felt by ourselves, our children and our grandchildren, decades from now – 10 years before we start doing HIP II. 20 years before we start VERS and if you are 30 years old, and get enrolled in CareShield Life, it may be 50 years before you need the payouts, longer if you are lucky.

Very few countries can make such long term plans, and anticipate needs and opportunities into the distant future. But in Singapore, we can, and we will. This Government believes it owes it to you to look ahead, share our thinking with you, pool our ideas, and work with you to make it happen. Our plans will not unfold exactly as we predict, because nobody can tell what will befall us over the next half century. What new technologies will disrupt the world? Will it be a world where countries big and small can work together? Will there be war or peace? But whatever the future brings, we know what Singapore must strive for, to give ourselves the best chances of success. We must have a thriving economy and sound Government finances, to generate the resources to carry out our projects. We must maintain political stability and outstanding leadership, so that we can continue to plan for the future. And most important of all, we must always stay one united people, and work together to build a better Singapore for ourselves.

Building and rebuilding Singapore is not just about satisfying material needs. The human spirit must flourish in Singapore. Recently, the National Geographic magazine published a special issue on Singapore: City of Tomorrow. You can pick up a copy later after the Rally. The issue celebrates ordinary Singaporeans doing extraordinary things, taking the path less travelled, excelling in their own fields.

One of them is Mark Ong, an artist who designs customised sneakers for celebrities and shoe companies under his own brand name SBTG, pronounced “sabotage”. You would never have guessed it, but it works. It all started when he won an online competition in 2003 and overnight had an order for 72 pairs of sneakers. He sold those first pairs for US$300 each, and his earlier works now sell for thousands of dollars. I wish my old sneakers were as valuable. To Mark, this is a dream come true, as he has loved drawing since he was a child, inspired by the art and creativity of his parents. Congratulations Mark.

There are many Singaporeans just like Mark, following their passions, breaking new ground, doing Singapore proud. Let me share with you a few I have come across recently:

This is Dr Azhar Ali, a Senior Research Scientist at the Cancer Science Institute of Singapore. Azhar is leading a team of researchers from Singapore and the US to study lung cancer. The team recently made a breakthrough because they discovered that a slimming drug could help bring lung cancer under control. Syabas Azhar.

These are Darius Cheung and Roshni Mahtani. DPM Teo met them in Jakarta and told me about them. They are husband and wife, both digital entre-preneurs. Each with their own online business – his and hers. Darius co-founded 99.co, a search platform for property that connects agents, buyers and sellers, not just in Singapore but also Indonesia, which by the way has a very lively start up and tech scene and there are many opportunities there. Roshni founded a media company that operates theAsianparent.com, a website popular with many Singaporean parents with young children. Well done Darius and Roshni.

This is Sim Chi Yin. She is an award winning documentary photographer and artist. She was commissioned as the Nobel Peace Prize photographer last year, the first Asian to be chosen, and travels to places like North Korea to pursue her very adventurous projects. She recently joined Magnum Photos, an acclaimed international photographic cooperative. You cannot apply. You have to be invited to join. Chi Yin is not able to be here, but I am happy to have her parents with us tonight.

This is Michael Ker, who gave up his career as a pharmacist to take over his father’s popiah business and carry on his 79-year old family legacy. If you look very carefully these are the popiahs and he also sells kueh pie tee. Michael now travels the world to introduce his popiah and promote Singapore food. All the best Michael.

And, finally, Wong Kah Chun, a conductor and composer. Kah Chun grew up in a Chinese-speaking family. He discovered Western classical music as a young boy at Jurong Primary School. His math teacher was in charge of the school band, and asked him to join it. Through his school band, Kah Chun found his love for music, pursued his music education and won a scholarship to the NUS-Yong Siew Toh Conservatory of Music. After that a National Arts Council (NAC) scholarship to do his Masters’ in Germany. School bands started in 1965. Soon after we became independent, Mr Lee Kuan Yew made school bands a priority. This gave many students from modest backgrounds the opportunity to pick up music. In our first National Day Parade in 1966, many newly formed school bands marched with pride, wearing their new uniforms. This was before Kah Chun was born. Today, aged 32, Kah Chun is the chief conductor of the Nuremberg Symphony Orchestra in Germany – a prestigious appointment. Next year, Kah Chun will be a guest conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for their Lunar New Year concert. Kah Chun also co-founded Project Infinitude, an initiative to bring music to less privileged and special needs children, in Singapore and elsewhere. He is giving back to society, so that others can discover music just like he did. Here he is with the kids at Child at Street 11, a non-profit organisation that runs a pre-school in Ang Mo Kio. But when Kah Chun comes home to his HDB flat in Jurong West that he grew up in – second floor, still no air con, sweaty at night – he says it is still “the best because it is home, and better than any hotel”.

These are just a few of many, many Singaporeans who are pursuing dreams, breaking new ground, and flying our flag high. We rejoice in their successes. They show the world that here in Singapore, passion can indeed be made possible. Our forefathers transformed Singapore from mudflats to a metropolis. Thanks to them, today we are in an immensely stronger position. With what we now have, we can achieve so much more together. 100 years from now, Singapore should stand out not just for its modern skyscrapers and world rankings, but for being a nation of boundless opportunities. A society where every skill and talent is recognised, developed and celebrated and where those who have done well contribute back to society, and help others to do better. As one of the Primary 2 MGS girls puts it: “Singapore may be a small country but we have big hearts”. Let us live up to that ambition. Let us continue to stand tall, chase rainbows, and work together for many brighter tomorrows. Thank you, and good night.


# 2019

My fellow Singaporeans, good evening.

This year, we commemorate our Bicentennial, two hundred years of Singapore’s modern history.

We began in January at the Singapore River. Since then, many community groups, businesses, schools and even individuals have marked the Bicentennial in their own ways, and reflected on their own histories. I recently attended the Eurasian Festival. This marked 100 years of the Eurasian Association, and showcased our unique Eurasian history and culture. Earlier in April, five Indian dance groups held a combined performance, the Natya Yatra, at the Esplanade. They were celebrating 100 years of Indian classical dance in Singapore. There have been many events in the heartlands too. In Teck Ghee, we organised “Happily ever after – then and now” to celebrate the diverse and changing wedding customs in Singapore. Some 90 couples, old and young, took the occasion to renew their wedding vows. It was a meaningful and joyous event. For Jalan Kayu, former residents recreated what their kampong looked like in the good old days, including the barber chair along the five-foot way. One of them, Uncle Ng Ah Chye, told vivid stories about life in the 1960s, almost like “李大傻讲古”. He had served in the Police Reserve Unit, and helped restore order in Geylang during the 1964 racial riots. Uncle Ng also helped to rescue residents during floods. The young people who think that floods are a very unusual thing asked him which year. Of course he could not remember because it happened many years. Uncle Ng also took part in our very first National Day Parade in 1966!

For this year’s Parade, we were honoured to have the leaders of our three closest neighbours, Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia as our guests, and hundreds of thousands of us have visited the Bicentennial Experience at Fort Canning. The vivid re-enactments brought our rich and complex history to life, and reminded us why we are proud to be Singaporean. We had planned to close the show after the September school holidays. But we have received so many requests to extend it. So we have decided to extend the Bicentennial Experience to the end of the Bicentennial year. I hope you will go and see it if you have not already done so. It is well-worth. This will give more people the chance to see it. 

All these activities help us trace our long history, and appreciate the broader context that has shaped and created modern Singapore. In our journey, we overcame many difficulties, adapted to drastic changes in our world, and blazed bold paths forward. As we look towards the future, we will need this resourcefulness and resolve more than ever.

We have a full agenda. In my Malay speech earlier, I spoke about education and upgrading, and the importance of practising our faiths in open and inclusive ways to strengthen our unity and harmony. I spoke about Islam primarily, but it applies to all faiths. In Mandarin, I spoke about external challenges, particularly what US-China tensions mean for us. I also discussed the economic situation, and how we are preparing our workers and companies to cope – short-term and long-term. These are important issues, which concern all Singaporeans.

In my English speech, I want to talk about three other important things. First, enabling every young person to succeed, regardless of his or her background. Second, supporting people to work for longer, as we are living longer, and third, protecting ourselves from climate change, and renewing our city for the next century. 

Investing in People – Preschools
Let me start with how we are giving our young the best possible start in life. So that anyone who works hard will have a chance to succeed, regardless of starting point or family background. Because this is what meritocracy in Singapore is about. 

We have made good on this promise by investing heavily in education. Our starting point used to be primary one. School brought everyone up to speed. Not just on academics, but also basic health and development. We introduced dental check-ups, as well as vaccinations. If you were underweight in primary school, you may remember the School Milk Scheme too. Generations of children have been through our schools. They received a sound education and good healthcare, and graduated better educated than their parents. Recently, Save The Children, an international NGO, ranked Singapore the best place in the world for a child to grow up in, and last year, the World Bank published a Human Capital Index. This measures the knowledge, skills, and health that a child born today can expect to attain by age 18. Among 157 countries, Singapore ranked first. So when they launched the Index in Bali at the IMF World Bank conference, they invited me to go and they interviewed me on our experience. A brief 15 minutes, not quite a National Day Rally. How we made this journey. But the journey is not over. But we are going further. We want to start earlier in a child’s life, because these years make a big difference to his development. Parents play an important role. But a good preschool education can make a crucial difference. That is why several years ago, we made a major shift to improve preschool education. Let me share what we have done so far, and what more we plan to do.

First, we have doubled full-day preschool capacity, to almost 180,000 places It is enough places for every child aged three and above. Young parents in newer estates, like Sengkang and Punggol, are much happier. Their MPs too, because the queues have shortened – queues at preschools, and also queues at Meet the People sessions!

Second, we have upgraded the preschools. The new HDB void deck centres are better designed and appointed. We have built some mega centres too with comprehensive facilities. Like this PCF Sparkletots centre at Punggol. It looks like a holiday resort, but the kids are expected to study quite hard there. The children have plenty of space to run around and enjoy a wider range of activities. When I visited, these kids were in their cooking studio, making pizza! They asked me to pretend to be the teacher – I said, I do not know how to make pizza, so please show me – which is what they are doing.

Third, we set up MOE Kindergartens. By operating kindergartens, MOE gains direct experience, improves curriculum design, and ultimately raises standards across the industry. MOE Kindergarten is also a new preschool model. Each MOE Kindergarten is located together with a primary school. Each kindergarten offers all three Mother Tongue Languages, and provides a bilingual environment, just like a primary school. Today, we have 24 MOE Kindergartens, and will more than double the number in the next few years. 

Fourth, we are giving pre-school teachers better training and career progression. We have set up the National Institute of Early Childhood Development (NIEC) to upgrade training for preschool teachers and raise their standing. NIEC enrolled its first students this year. So these NIEC students are kindergarten teachers or will be kindergarten teachers. Some are fresh trainees. Others are experienced teachers like Palaniammal, also called Sheila. Sheila started out as a preschool teacher. Over time, she upgraded herself, with a Diploma in Teaching and an Advanced Diploma in Leadership. Now, she is a Vice Principal at a PCF preschool. Sheila really enjoys working with children, and is very good at her job. Last year, MOE recognised her as an Outstanding Preschool Mother Tongue Language Teacher. But Sheila aspires to do even better. Recently, she enrolled in NIEC, to specialise in Tamil Language Teaching. With dedicated teachers like Sheila, our children are in good hands. Well done, Sheila!

Fifth, we continue to make preschool more affordable. The Government funds the Anchor Operators and Partner Operators, to keep fees down. And all parents receive significant subsidies for childcare, with lower income parents receiving substantially more. Still, for middle income parents, preschool fees can take up a chunk of their household budget. Especially if two or more kids are in preschool at the same time. 

Like the Low family, for example. They are middle-income. Both parents are working. They have two sons: Kaylen who is turning 5, and Kyler who is 2. Both boys attend a government-supported preschool.

To help families like the Lows, we will enhance preschool subsidies. The Lows currently do not qualify for additional means-tested subsidies, because their household income exceeds the current maximum income, which is $7,500. We will raise the income ceiling to $12,000 per month. This will extend the means-tested subsidies to 30,000 more households, including the Lows. On top of this, we will also increase the quantum of preschool subsidies, across the board.

Before the changes, Mr and Mrs Low pay about $560 per month for each child’s preschool. The enhanced subsidy will knock off a third of their preschool expenses, which will then go down to around $370 per child. Later on, when Kaylen and Kyler enter primary school, the family’s expenses will go down even further. Because primary school itself is almost free – you have to pay a few dollars miscellaneous fees. If the boys need student care after school in the afternoons, it will cost the Lows about $300 per child. So it is even lower than the $370 that they will be paying after the enhanced subsidies. In the medium term, we aim to bring down full-day preschool expenses to around that level – which means the cost of primary school plus afterschool student care is $370 coming down to around $300. We need a while to get there, but we are working towards this.

Recently several PAP women Members of Parliament (MPs), led by SPS Sun Xueling, surveyed young parents on preschool. Understandably, the parents were concerned about affordability. The MPs made an important point: that preschool should be like housing and healthcare, where we have a good and affordable government-funded option for all Singaporeans. There is a private option if you want, but for many Singaporeans, in fact, the majority, the government-funded option is high quality and more than satisfactory.

I agree with them. For housing we have HDB. For healthcare, we have restructured hospitals. Similarly, for preschool, we should have good quality, government-supported choices available to all Singaporeans. This is in fact our policy. Today, just over half of all pre-school places are government-supported. Over time, we will bring this up to 80%, just like HDB and we are putting a lot of resources towards this. Already, the Government spends about $1 billion a year on early childhood education, and this will more than double over the next few years. Hopefully with all these improvements, parents will no longer think of preschools as an expensive phase of bringing up their children.

The younger ministers have a few more ideas to support couples to have more kids, and to keep HDB flats affordable. I will leave them to make the announcements later. Meanwhile I will be counting the number of babies born, and hoping for the number to go up!

I want to update you on one more programme, and that is KidSTART. We piloted KidSTART three years ago, to give extra help to 1,000 children from less privileged families. The KidSTART team advises and supports the parents, often a single parent – on nutrition, child development, and parent-child interaction. We are very happy with the results, and so are the parents. Let’s take a look at the video.

KidSTART is a good programme. I am confident we are on the right track. We still need to follow up for a few more years, to assess more exactly its benefits. But for each new cohort of babies, there is no time to lose. So we will expand KidSTART to reach another 5,000 children over the next three years. Then we will take stock again how to expand KidSTART further. 

Investing in People – Post-Secondary Education 
The commitment to do our best for every child is deeply embedded in our education system. That is why we heavily subsidise school fees from preschool to university, polytechnic and ITE. So that every child can afford a good education. 

I recently received a letter from an NUS law student, Quek Lu Yi. Lu Yi wrote about how she felt a sense of inferiority when she was growing up, because many of her classmates came from better-off families. Let me read from her letter. She said as she grew older, she realised that “this was an extremely misplaced sense of shame. My parents had done nothing wrong. They’d supported me throughout my life and gave me the best they could.” A few years before Lu Yi entered NUS, her family ran into difficulty. Lu Yi worried about becoming a burden on her family. She already had one sibling in university and another about to start. And even after she started her law course, financial concerns were frequently on her mind – buying books, a laptop, school trips and other activities. But she applied for and received a bursary, which significantly eased her financial worries. 

MOE has done a comprehensive review of tertiary fees and bursaries. First, MOE looked at whether our universities can operate more economically. Two of them, the Singapore Institute of Technology (SIT) and the Singapore University of Social Sciences (SUSS), are more applied, and do more industry attachments and internships. Their operating costs per student can be lower, especially as student intakes grow. So MOE will lower the annual fees for the full-time general degree programmes in SIT and SUSS, from around $8,000 now, to $7,500. 

Second, MOE will significantly enhance government bursaries. For university courses, we will increase government bursaries from up to 50 per cent of general degree fees today, to up to 75 per cent. For a general degree programme in NUS, like Economics or Computer Science, full fees are about $8,000 a year. Currently, a lower income student would pay around half that, $4,000 a year, if he uses his bursary fully to his fees. With the enhanced bursary, he would pay only $2,000 per year. Similarly, for polytechnic diploma programmes, we will increase the bursary coverage from up to 80 per cent of the fees today, to up to 95 per cent. For polytechnic diploma, full fees are now $3,000. With a bursary, a lower income poly student currently pays about $600 a year. After we enhance the bursary, he will pay only $150. I have given examples of lower income students. Actually, 6 in 10 students in our polytechnics and universities are eligible for government bursaries. So these enhancements will benefit many middle income students too. Students in Government-funded diploma and degree programmes at ITE, NAFA, and LASALLE will also be covered.

I want to say something about one particular university course, and that is Medicine. It is very expensive to train a medical student. Hence, Medicine has the highest course fees of all the university courses. Today, after Government subsidies, medical school fees are almost $29,000 a year at NUS, and $35,000 a year at NTU. These are not small amounts. 

We should not let the cost of medical school deter good students from studying medicine. In fact, we want doctors to have diverse educational and family backgrounds. On the educational front, recent medical school intakes have included more polytechnic graduates, and this year, we had one ITE graduate for the first time, in NUS medical school. But on the socio-economic front, we should do more to encourage lower income students to do medicine. Therefore, we will enhance government bursaries for medical school, to make them significantly more generous than bursaries for other courses. If you add together other bursaries from the university, then lower income students will now pay at most $5,000 per year to study Medicine. This balance can be covered by student loans with much less difficulty. So, if you are a student and you are worried about your finances and you have an ambition to be a doctor, I say do not worry about the money. That will be taken care of. Go for it.

All these fee and bursary adjustments I have talked about, for both medical and non-medical courses, will apply to both existing and new students, from the next academic year.

The point of these changes to fees and bursaries is not just the dollars and cents. We are determined to make our education system as accessible as possible. We want every Singaporean son and daughter to have the opportunity to receive a good education, and start well in life, regardless of family circumstances. Students from less privileged backgrounds must be confident that they will get financial help, if they need it to see them through their education. They should neither feel disadvantaged nor inferior comparing themselves to better off classmates, nor should they be deterred from pursuing a course just because of money. This is fundamental to maintaining Singapore as an open meritocracy. 

Apart from government bursaries, our universities, polytechnics and ITE also raise funds to create their own bursaries. These bursaries often have names associated with them, like the EW Barker Bursary in NUS named after our founding Law Minister, or the Class of 1995 Term Bursary in NTU. The Class of 1995, that means the graduating class of 1995, must have come together and raised some money, endowed a bursary, to remind the next generation that when it comes to your turn to, go thou and do likewise. This personalises the bursary award. The recipient is grateful to the donor, the donor is happy to have done a good deed, and both donor and recipient honour the person after whom the bursary is named. And in time, hopefully the recipient will make good, remember, and be moved to pay it forward. 

Lu Yi, the NUS student who wrote to me, received such a bursary. Hers was a Kwa Geok Choo Bursary, which the NUS Law School had established in my mother’s name. She wrote to me because I think I was one of those who contributed to the bursary fund. She wrote in her letter: “Thank you for opening my eyes to the compassion and generosity of our society, for being the helping hand and for setting my mind at ease. This is a kindness that will stay with me through my life and I hope to be able to do my part and help others in similar positions in the future”. Thank you, Lu Yi. We wish you all the best for your studies. 

We try very hard to kindle the same warm personal feeling with Government bursaries, but alas, it is not so easy to write a letter like that to say “Dear Government, thank you very much”. So to complement the Government bursaries, I hope the universities, polytechnics and ITE will set up more bursaries of their own, in people’s names. And I hope the alumni and community will contribute generously too. The Government will match your donations, up to 3 times for the newer universities, and up to 1.5 times for the rest. Our institutions often raise funds for new buildings and professorships, and this is always meritorious. But bursaries can make a crucial difference to the recipients – and they have the extra human touch. If you donate towards a bursary, you enable some promising young person to get a good start in life. This strengthens our sense of obligation to each other, and the bonds that link us all together as one society. 

Expanding Contributions from Older Workers 
Our education system gives young Singaporeans a headstart when they enter the job market. But our support does not end there. As people progress in their careers, SkillsFuture will help to keep their knowledge and skills up to date. We need to do this, because jobs and skills are turning over faster than ever. 

We also need to keep on re-skilling ourselves for another reason. Singaporeans are living longer, and mostly also want to work longer. So, my next topic is about helping Singaporeans work longer, if they wish to do so.

Our life expectancy at birth – the latest figures which came out just a few weeks ago – is now the longest in the world – nearly 85 years , even longer than Japan! This means about half of us can expect to live longer than 85 years. We all know many people who are older than 85. Quite a few turned up for my National Day Observance Ceremony in Teck Ghee, including this sprightly lady, Mdm Liang Juat Eng. She is 102. In the Rally in 2007, when I talked about ageing, I checked out the numbers and reported that we then had 500 centenarians – people aged 100 and over. This year, for my speech, I said please update the number, and In just over a decade, the number has more than doubled – we now have 1,300 centenarians, including Mdm Liang! That means every MP has about 14 of them – should look them up. I hope some of them are watching my speech on TV. This means Singaporeans stay healthy for longer too, protected by MediShield Life.

Most seniors in fact do not want to stop working. We are healthy for longer and living longer, but we do not want to spend more years idle in retirement. We want to stay active and engaged, to feel a sense of worth and purpose. Also many of us want to build up a bigger nest egg for when we eventually retire. Therefore, many of us have multiple careers in a lifetime. 

Enabling seniors to continue working productively takes a joint effort. Employers must redesign their training, jobs, and careers around the abilities and strengths of the older workers. The older workers may not be as strong or quick as their younger colleagues, but this is actually not a problem in many jobs, where we can redesign the job, or we can use technology. This way, employers can continue to tap on the skills, knowledge and experience of our older workers. Employees, on their part, must adopt the right mindset. We must be ready to adapt, learn new things, and take on different responsibilities. We cannot just be satisfied doing our old jobs well, because many jobs will change. And some jobs will disappear – shorthand typists and telephone switchboard operators do not exist anymore. Re-skilling ourselves must start early even when we are in our 40s and 50s, if not even earlier. But 40s, and 50s, you are not quite so young any more, but not yet old. And you have to pay attention. Because if you do it then, then you will have useful skills which will be valuable. We hope as you near retirement age, and you can keep improving even in our 60s. And of course, Government will fully support both employers and employees in this endeavour. 

I visited Workforce Singapore’s Careers Connect centre in January. There, I met Nahariah Mohd Nor, 47. She used to be a bank teller. Nowadays banks need fewer tellers because of online banking, ATMs, and now VTMs, or video teller machines, which are more advanced than ATMs. Nahariah took up an offer by her employer to retrain as a Customer Service Officer for VTMs. She does not stand around at the VTMs; she is sitting at a console in an ops room, monitoring multiple VTMs. When customers have problems with the VTM, they press the Help button on the machine. Nahariah’s face pops up on the screen, and she advises customers what to do. She told me, usually the first question she is asked is: “Are you real or are you AI?” So she smiles and goes: “No, no, I’m real!” The customers may be a bit doubtful at first because the AI can be very good, but very soon they can tell she has the human touch. As a result, Nahariah is doing a new job, serves more customers than she used to, and can be productive and employable for many more years. Well done, Nahariah! 

I should also commend Nahariah’s employer, DBS. DBS has made great efforts to modernise itself, and to adopt technology. In the past one year, it was named the best bank in the world by three major industry publications. Most importantly, DBS has been working very hard to retrain its employees. It has shown care and concern for its people, even as it transforms itself. In fact, if they did not share care and concern for its people, it could not have become the best bank in the world. This is the right approach, and I encourage other companies to emulate DBS’ example. Good job Lah, DBS! 

It is not just big companies that can retrain and upgrade workers. So can SMEs. This is Chan Ban Kiong. He is 64 – much older than Nahariah! Ban Kiong has been in the marine industry for over 30 years. He works for Mencast Marine, which makes and repairs ship propellers. He used to make ship propellers by hand. First, he crafts a mould out of sand, to create a prototype propeller. He uses this aluminium prototype to make a second mould. Finally, he casts the bronze propeller itself. It is hard work, and requires experience and skill. Mencast decided to increase productivity by using 3D printers to manufacture the propeller prototypes. But they still valued the experienced eye of their older workers, to ensure the quality of the work. So they are training Ban Kiong and eight colleagues to operate the 3D printers – and all of them are over 60! Now, their work will become safer and easier, and the production time will be faster by a third. So it is win-win-win, for the workers, company and customers too, and that is the way it should be. Well done, Mencast and Ban Kiong! I hope more companies will likewise help their older workers remain employable well into their 60s. 

The Government will do its best to support older workers and the businesses that employ them. Last year, the Ministry of Manpower, MOM, set up a Tripartite Workgroup on Older Workers to study the issue. I met the Workgroup members last month for lunch. They told me they had had intense discussions. Even at lunch, the discussion was quite intense. Why? Older workers wanted to be certain of continued employment for longer. When can I retire later? Can I be reemployed longer? Can I be reemployed more years at a time? But employers were worried about business costs and the uncertain economic outlook, and they said “I support you, I understand your aspirations, but I need more flexibility. Because I do not know what will happen. If I go broke, your job is gone too.” In the end the Workgroup reached consensus. 
They made four key recommendations. First, to raise the Retirement Age from 62 today to 65. Second, to raise the Re-employment Age from 67 today to 70. Third, to increase CPF contributions for older workers. Fourth, to achieve all this in gradual steps, by about 2030. I think these are sensible recommendations. The Government accepts them in full. Let me explain them in a little more, and I will start with CPF contributions, which is a little more complicated. Today, CPF contribution rates for workers begin to taper down after the workers turn 55. We will raise the rates for workers above 55. We will take the first step in 2021. And we will take subsequent steps after that. The whole process will take 10 years or so, about there, but it depends on economic conditions. By the time we are done, those 60 and below will enjoy the full CPF rates. The CPF rates will only begin to taper down after 60, and level off after 70. So this is the first change – to increase CPF for older workers gradually over the next 10 years or so. 

Next, in 2022, we will start to raise both the Retirement Age and Re-employment Age for all employers. The Retirement Age will go from 62 – which is what it is today – to 63 in 2022, and eventually to 65 by 2030. The Re-employment Age will go from 67 – which is where it is now – to 68, also in 2022, and eventually to 70, by 2030. Therefore, by 2030, we should reach our 1st and 2nd objectives, which means Retirement Age goes to 65, and Re-employment Age goes to 70. 

The Government will help businesses to adjust to these new arrangements. We will implement a support package for them and DPM Heng Swee Keat will announce them in next year’s Budget. 

As a major employer ourselves, the Government will take the lead for public officers. The Public Service will raise its Retirement and Re-employment Ages one year earlier, in 2021 instead of 2022. I encourage private sector companies which can do the same, also to do so. 

All these changes – to the Retirement Age, the Re-employment Age, and the CPF rates – will support older workers to continue working longer and to be more financially independent. 

Let me add one last point here, to be absolutely clear: we are not making any changes to CPF withdrawal policies or CPF withdrawal ages. You can still take out some money at age 55. And you can still start your CPF payouts from age 65. All that remains exactly the same. So please ignore any rumours you may hear about this, or messages on WhatsApp, because they are fake news! 

Preparing for Climate Change
Next, let me talk about renewing our city and our home for the next century. I will start with climate change. Climate change may seem abstract and distant for many of us. But it is one of the gravest challenges facing humankind. Our young people instinctively appreciate the seriousness of the issue. When the National Youth Council recently asked young people what their vision was for Singapore’s future, many spoke about the environment. Let’s hear from them. 

What is climate change? What is it about and why should we be concerned? Let me try to explain a huge and complicated subject simply and briefly. Human activity is pumping more and more carbon dioxide (CO2) into the atmosphere. We produce CO2. When we drive a car or take a plane. Or run a manufacturing plant. Or use electrical appliances at home, because nearly all our electricity is generated from natural gas, which is a fossil fuel. The CO2 builds up in the atmosphere, traps heat from the sun, and causes the planet to warm up.

Already, the Earth’s average temperature has gone up by 1 degree Celsius compared to pre-industrial times, over 100 years ago. One degree Celsius does not sound like much, but it is very significant. Furthermore, temperatures are continuing to rise, faster and faster. Ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica are melting into the oceans, and this is raising sea levels around the world. The UN currently projects that sea levels will rise by up to one metre by the end of this century, about three feet, just 80 years from now. But the scientists’ estimates have been going up. So sea levels may quite possibly rise higher and faster than that. Global warming is also making the weather more extreme. Droughts are getting more severe and prolonged. Rainfall and storms are becoming more intense. 

Singapore is already feeling the impact. Our weather is palpably hotter. Rainstorms are heavier. And this will very likely worsen over the next few decades, within the lifetimes of many of us. A recent Swiss study found that by 2050, just 30 years from now, several cities in the world will experience unprecedented climate shifts. And it found that one of them will be Singapore.

We must prepare for the impact of climate change on Singapore. There are many risks and consequences. New diseases, more frequent pandemics, food shortages, forced migration of displaced populations, and even wars. Because we are a low-lying island, Singapore is especially vulnerable to one grave threat, and that is rising sea levels.

In the 1960s and 70s, floods were common in Singapore, especially during the rainy season. That is why Uncle Ng Ah Chye from Jalan Kayu, whom I told you about earlier, had to rescue stranded residents whenever it flooded. When we had high tides, monsoon drains in low-lying parts of Singapore would fill up almost to the brim, even if it was not raining. And if it did rain, it would flood. Gan Kim Yong told me when he was a child, his family lived in Hong Kong Street in Chinatown, where his father ran a shop. This is Temple Street, but it looked like this also. When there was an exceptionally high tide, which happened a few times a year, the tide water would rise up from the drains onto the five-foot way in front of the shop even without rain. So his father had to build racks to stack up his goods, out of reach of the water. To Kim Yong, who was then a boy, this was great fun. But actually it was a serious matter. These old flooding problems are now largely resolved. We improved the drainage system. We required buildings to be built on higher platforms, at least three metres above the mean sea level. Three metres sounds a lot because most of us are less than two metres tall. But three meters is not actually that high, because at high tide, the water can go up as high as two metres above the mean sea level. That leaves just a one metre buffer to cope with other factors. For example, heavy rain. If it rains, it fills up a little bit and the water has some where to go. Because of this one metre buffer, we have managed to deal with our flooding problems thus far. But, with global warming, if sea levels rise by one metre, our buffer is gone. Because when it is high tide, two metres above that, water is already reaching the five-foot way. Because if heavy rain coincides with a high tide, the water will have nowhere to go. We will, literally, be in deep water! 

Like Bangladesh whenever they are hit by a cyclone. Or, to take an extreme example, like New Orleans, much of which is below sea level – here you can see how the city was completely flooded when Hurricane Katrina hit it in 2005. 

So what can we do? Three things: understand climate change, mitigate climate change, and adapt to climate change. Let me explain them one by one.

First, we have to understand what climate change means specifically for Singapore. Is it hot weather, extreme weather, drought, intense rain, sea levels, and therefore what do we do. So we have set up a Centre for Climate Research Singapore, CCRS. I visited them earlier this year. They have a team of scientists and meteorologists, and supercomputers to model the weather and do research. They showed me the records they have, which go back more than a century. Including these old weather diaries – which I am looking at. They go back to the 1930s, which were meticulously kept at the weather station on Mount Faber.

CCRS is cooperating with their counterparts in neighbouring countries to study in more detail how climate change is affecting Southeast Asia. They are finding that Singapore, being near the equator, is more vulnerable to climate change than the global model suggests. 

Second, we must mitigate climate change. What does mitigate mean? It means we must do our part to reduce CO2 emissions. Singapore has joined international efforts to reduce emissions. We are part of the Paris Climate Agreement, and we have committed to slow down and ultimately cap our CO2 emissions by around 2030. To help achieve this, last year we introduced a carbon tax. Each of us can do our bit to promote sustainability and mitigate climate change. Like remembering to switch off the lights, reducing waste, and reusing and recycling more.

In Singapore, we generate a huge amount of waste – whether from excessive packaging, food waste, or electronic waste. These all have to be disposed of, and often incinerated, which then generates more CO2. Our landfill is at Pulau Semakau. But that will eventually fill up, and then we will need Bukit Semakau, and then Gunung Semakau! So we have to find a sustainable solution. 

This is where young Singaporeans have been doing their part. Like Farah Sanwari, who is passionate about sustainability. Farah co-founded Repair Kopitiam a few years ago, to teach others how to repair damaged electronic appliances, furniture, toys and clothing. So these items can gain a new lease of life and you can use them longer, instead of being thrown away prematurely. We need more young Singaporeans to be like Farah, to be problem-solvers, innovators, scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs. As the song suggests, be prepared to do our part. This is the Grand Challenge for their generation.

Although Singapore may not be able to stop climate change by ourselves, we can contribute to solutions, and we must do our fair share. Then we can be credible asking others to reduce their emissions too, and work towards a global solution to climate change. Unfortunately, such a global solution is still very far off. So we must work for the best, but be prepared for the worst. 

Therefore, the third thing we must do, is to adapt to climate change, and especially rising sea levels. We will need local measures to protect individual buildings and developments – and we have been doing this. For example, we have built MRT stations with elevated entrances. When you enter an MRT station, you need to climb up a few steps before you go down the escalator. This is flood protection for our MRT system. If we need to raise our steps to be built higher, we will do that one day. We also require new developments to be built on higher platforms, instead of building three metres above mean sea level like before, they must now be at least four metres above mean sea level. For critical infrastructure like Changi Airport Terminal 5 and Tuas Port, we are raising the platforms even higher, at least five metres above mean sea level. But local measures will not be enough. We have many older buildings. These cannot be lifted up, or transported to higher ground. In fact, large parts of Singapore are low-lying, and we need to protect these low-lying areas as a whole.

Let me show you the topography of Singapore. This is a map of Singapore. The light green are the lowest areas. The dark green is a little bit higher. The brown are our hills, and the dark brown are our “mountains”! Not very much of it, so I do not think we can all retreat to live on Bukit Timah! Now let me show you the lowest parts, which are up to four metres above mean sea level. When sea levels rise, all these parts of Singapore will increasingly be at risk. Not underwater yet, but at risk like Chinatown used to be in the old days – high tide, rain, troubled. If you look carefully, there is a long stretch on the East Coast from Changi to the city. If you zoom in a little bit, you might be able to see where your house is. Not only will property values be affected, but safety and liveability also. And it will affect not only these particular areas, but the whole city. Because roads and trains run through the low-lying areas; hospitals, schools, and workplaces are all there. We cannot lose a big chunk of our city and expect the rest of Singapore to carry on as usual. Therefore, beyond localised measures, we need to protect entire areas, and the way to do that is to build coastal defences.

We have studied our whole coastline in detail, and we have divided it into different segments. Some are more vulnerable than others, and we need different strategies to protect each of them, and we will have to prioritise the work, starting with the more critical segments, and in particular, City-East Coast and also Jurong Island. 

I will talk about the City – East Coast, which is a long stretch comprising the city area, and the eastern coastline. Let’s look at the city area first. We built the Marina Reservoir and Marina Barrage, to protect the city area from flooding. Many of us enjoy visiting the Marina Barrage, to picnic and fly kites on top of the Pump House, especially if we have little kids. But PUB did not build the Pump House for kite flying. Its real purpose is to house seven giant pumps. That is why it is so tall. When it rains heavily during high tide, these pumps pump water out of Marina Reservoir into the sea, so that rain falling in the city area can then drain into Marina Reservoir. When sea levels rise, one Pump House will not be enough. We will need to build a second pump house on the opposite end of the Barrage. PUB has planned for this.

So that’s for the city. For the eastern coastline, we will need possibly other solutions. We have looked at other countries for inspiration. In particular, we studied the Netherlands. 

The word “Netherlands” itself means “low-lying lands”. Half of the country is at most 1 metre above sea level. In fact, one quarter (27%) of their land is actually below sea level, what the Dutch call “polders”. This is land that the Dutch have reclaimed from the sea. They first build a seawall in the water, enclose an area. Then they pump out the water behind the seawall to create dry land, and that dry land can be lower than sea level – and they have to keep pumping water out. The Dutch are famous for their windmills. But do you know why the Dutch originally built windmills? It was not to take tourist pictures. It was to pump water out from polders and keep the land dry. I do not think windmills will do very well in Singapore. The only windmill we had in Singapore was at Holland Village, and even that is gone now. But, polders are a serious option for us. We are building a small polder at Pulau Tekong, to gain some experience operating one. The new land will be used for SAF training. 

Polders are one option to protect our eastern coastline. Instead of just building a seawall along the coastline, you extend out with a polder, build a seawall further out, you not only protect existing low-lying areas. But you extend out and create more land reclaimed from the sea which we can use for housing and other valuable purposes. That is one possible solution for the East Coast, to build polders along the coastline. 

But there are other alternatives. For example, we could reclaim a series of islands offshore, from Marina East all the way to Changi. We join up the islands, connect them up with barrages, and create a freshwater reservoir, which will be similar to Marina Reservoir. This solution will make PUB very happy because we will have another big reservoir and it will enhance our water resilience. Our four taps will become more reliable.

What I showed you are just artists’ impressions, just to give you a sense of the possibilities. We have not done engineering drawings yet. We will examine all the options carefully, and when the time comes, we will decide what is the best way to do it. This problem has good engineering solutions, although they will all cost money. How much will it cost, to protect ourselves against rising sea levels? My guess is probably $100 billion over 100 years, quite possibly more. If we only have 10 years to solve the problem, we will not have enough time or resources to do it. But because this is a 50 to 100-year problem, we can implement a 50 to 100-year solution to this problem. In Singapore, for long-term problems, we can make long-term solutions. Not everywhere, but in Singapore, yes, we can. 

We should treat climate change defences like we treat the SAF – with utmost seriousness. Work steadily at it, maintain a stable budget year after year, keep your eye on the target and do it over many years and several generations. That way we can afford it, and when we need it, we will have it ready. Both the SAF and climate change defences are existential for Singapore. These are life and death matters. Everything else must bend at the knee to safeguard the existence of our island nation. There is one difference between the two. With the SAF, we hope never to go to war. If you have a strong SAF, you may deter threats and avoid having to go to war. But with climate change, we know for sure sea levels will rise. The only uncertainty is whether they rise a few decades earlier, or a few decades later. Therefore, we will implement our climate change plans progressively, and keep them flexible. But we must start now and sustain the effort, as the Dutch have done over the centuries, and as we have done with the SAF.

We must make this effort. Otherwise one day, our children and grandchildren will be ashamed of what our generation did not do.

Building Singapore – the Greater Southern Waterfront
Beyond protecting ourselves from rising seas, we also have long-term plans to remake and take full advantage of our coastline. One of these plans is the Greater Southern Waterfront (GSW). I first spoke about this in the 2013 Rally. Since then we have worked out more definite ideas. Let me first sketch out the overall shape. The GSW comprises 30km of our southern coastline, from the Gardens by the Bay East, all the way to Pasir Panjang. It contains 2,000 hectares of land: six times the size of Marina Bay and in our terms, double the size of Punggol.

The GSW includes the PSA city terminals at Tanjong Pagar, Keppel, and Brani. And it also includes the Pasir Panjang Terminals too. By 2027, the city terminals will move to Tuas. Later on, in 2040, the Pasir Panjang Terminal will also go to Tuas Port. This will free up prime land for re-development. It will be an opportunity to reshape the GSW into a new place to live, work and play.

Let me start with “live”. Here is Keppel Club. It is a golf course. It is close to two MRT stations, and Labrador Nature Reserve. The lease is expiring in two years’ time, so this will be one of the first GSW developments. There is enough land here to build 9,000 housing units – HDB and private housing with waterfront promenades, with greenery, and open spaces. And that is just the start, because there is space and land for public and private housing elsewhere in the GSW too. With GSW the size of two Punggols, you get a sense of the possibilities. Think of it as Punggol by the Bay.

Next, I go on to "work” – the commercial areas. Several big companies already have offices near Labrador Park. Such as Google, Cisco and Unilever. We will develop more office space in the GSW, like this one, which is Mapletree Business City, will bring in more jobs. People can work near where they live, and live near where they work. This will create life and activity both during the day and at night.

Finally, I come to “play” – the fun part. There are many possibilities for fun and recreation. We will start by redeveloping the two old power stations in Pasir Panjang. These are the Pasir Panjang power stations. They used to supply electricity back in the 1960s, but were decommissioned long ago. We can find creative new uses for them. Just like how we made St James Power Station, near Vivo City, into a nightlife destination. Next, after Brani Terminal moves out, we can develop Pulau Brani together with Sentosa. We will build new attractions on Brani, just like we have Universal Studios on Sentosa. We will also revitalise Sentosa’s beach areas and expand its nature and heritage trails, to keep its island character. We will also link up the GSW with all the surrounding green areas, so that you have a whole connection from West Coast Park to East Coast Park, and also connect up the Rail Corridor and Sentosa. With a new green heart in the centre, Singapore will be even more of a City in a Garden. 

I have already received one special request. When we discussed these plans at Cabinet, Ng Chee Meng put his hand up, and said: “NTUC is very grateful to the Government for Downtown East. How about a Downtown South?” I said, ok, we will do that. We will set aside land for the Labour Movement to build a resort, probably on Pulau Brani. We will make this gesture, to thank our workers for all their contributions to the nation. Because Singapore is for all of us. 

Building Singapore – the Work of Generations
Our city today comprises multiple layers and the imprints of different eras. The Greater Southern Waterfront will add yet more layers to the city.

Over the centuries, people have come to Singapore from different lands. Bringing with them their identities, cultures and beliefs. Their hopes and dreams, their passions and aspirations. Slowly, they wove these strands together to become Singaporeans and to build today’s Singapore. 

The layout and architecture of our city reflects this richness and complexity. Faint traces of ancient Singapore survive, even today. In the 14th century, there were settlements at the mouth of the Singapore River, and near Bukit Larangan, known as Fort Canning Hill. Soon after the British arrived in 1819, they made a map of Singapore. It is a very interesting map. Let me orientate you. This is the Singapore River. Here is the Padang. This is Fort Canning Hill. The map shows a long feature, running from Fort Canning all the way to the Padang, which it described as “the historical lines of Singapore”. This was an ancient defensive line, an earth wall, dating back hundreds of years. Running along this earth wall was a stream. That stream became today’s Stamford Canal. The wall itself is gone, but Stamford Road follows the line of that wall. So today, when you walk along Stamford Road, you are walking along the ancient wall of Singapura. There is history there.

Parts of our Civic District and Central Business District are still laid out according to the first town plan that Raffles and his team drew up, 200 years ago. Many of the colonial buildings remain, often restored and repurposed, so the former Supreme Court and City Hall have become the National Gallery Singapore. Over two centuries, we have built and rebuilt generations of buildings. Today, we have created a distinctive city skyline, and a vibrant waterfront all round Marina Bay. 

When we first reclaimed Marina East, Central and South 40 years ago, they were empty – a blank slate. For some years, we left the new land fallow. Definite plans only came later, as we developed a clearer sense of what the city needed, and began putting the building blocks in place. Now a new downtown is taking shape in Marina South, anchored around Marina Bay Financial Centre and Marina Bay Sands. Marina Bay is still far from fully developed. Meanwhile, we are already looking ahead, for our next major move. 

Our modern port dates back to Raffles, who recognised Singapore’s qualities as a natural harbour. Nearly 50 years ago, we converted the wharves at Tanjong Pagar into our first container terminal. In 1991, as Tanjong Pagar reached its limits, we made a major decision: to reclaim land at Pasir Panjang to build a new container terminal. At that time, PSA was handling six million containers a year – they call them TEUs (twenty-foot equivalent units). But PSA had audacious plans: to build a port to handle six times that number, 36 million TEUs. 

Building Pasir Panjang Terminal was a considerable act of faith. But we backed PSA up, and PSA delivered: last year, it handled 36 million TEUs and more! Now we are making yet another leap, building Tuas Port, where PSA can double its volumes.

When PSA moves out of the city and Pasir Panjang terminals, these old spaces will once again be vacant – another blank slate. A new generation will have another opportunity to imagine and to build here some part of their vision for Singapore. I hope they will remember to place a marker somewhere, to remind themselves that PSA used to be there, and that it was the same daring and ambition, the same drive for excellence and determination to prevail, that made PSA a success and will make the GSW a reality. 

Over the years, I have talked about many major projects at National Day Rallies. These are all progressively taking shape. In 2013, I described Jewel at Changi Airport. At that time, Jewel was just a concept and an ambition. Now we have completed it, on time and within budget. Kudos to the Changi team! Singapore has a spectacular new gateway to the world. Many of you have visited it, and we are all rightly very proud of it. 

What we talk about, this Government, we will deliver. In the same way, we are realising our other ambitious plans. Punggol Digital District, Jurong Lake District, Changi Terminal 5, redevelopment of Paya Lebar Airbase, Tuas Port, and of course the Greater Southern Waterfront.

All these will not be done in a decade, or even in one generation. There will be space for successive generations to fill with their hopes and dreams. Each new generation will leave their mark on our city, as their predecessors have done.

Conclusion 
This Bicentennial year, as we commemorate our history and progress, we also commit ourselves to improve on what we have, and build a better Singapore for our children. All this depends on Singaporeans remaining one united people, and having an honest and capable government working together with you, for you, for Singapore.

The next few years will be very demanding. We have to hand over smoothly to a new generation of leaders, and continue to strive to realise our ambitions. My team will work with you to build this jewel of a nation, so that Singapore will always be a vibrant, thriving city where opportunities are open to all, and our children and their children will have a bright future. 

Let us strive together to create this future. Let us unite as one nation to build tomorrow’s Singapore.

Thank you and good night.

